other, had got hold of the idea that this worthy intended at no distant
date to offer the advantages of his hand and heart to Alexandra.

Besides the elevated and more solid individuals enumerated, there were
present a few younger though not less elegant guests. Besides Prince S.
and Evgenie Pavlovitch, we must name the eminent and fascinating Prince
N.--once the vanquisher of female hearts all over Europe. This gentleman
was no longer in the first bloom of youth--he was forty-five, but still
very handsome. He was well off, and lived, as a rule, abroad, and was
noted as a good teller of stories. Then came a few guests belonging to
a lower stratum of society--people who, like the Epanchins themselves,
moved only occasionally in this exalted sphere. The Epanchins liked to
draft among their more elevated guests a few picked representatives of
this lower stratum, and Lizabetha Prokofievna received much praise for
this practice, which proved, her friends said, that she was a woman of
tact. The Epanchins prided themselves upon the good opinion people held
of them.

One of the representatives of the middle-class present today was a
colonel of engineers, a very serious man and a great friend of Prince
S., who had introduced him to the Epanchins. He was extremely silent in
society, and displayed on the forefinger of his right hand a large ring,
probably bestowed upon him for services of some sort. There was also
a poet, German by name, but a Russian poet; very presentable, and even
handsome-the sort of man one could bring into society with impunity.
This gentleman belonged to a German family of decidedly bourgeois
origin, but he had a knack of acquiring the patronage of "big-wigs," and
of retaining their favour. He had translated some great German poem into
Russian verse, and claimed to have been a friend of a famous Russian
poet, since dead. (It is strange how great a multitude of literary
people there are who have had the advantages of friendship with some
great man of their own profession who is, unfortunately, dead.) The
dignitary's wife had introduced this worthy to the Epanchins. This
lady posed as the patroness of literary people, and she certainly
had succeeded in obtaining pensions for a few of them, thanks to her
influence with those in authority on such matters. She was a lady of
weight in her own way. Her age was about forty-five, so that she was a
very young wife for such an elderly husband as the dignitary. She had
been a beauty in her day and still loved, as many ladies of forty-five
do love, to dress a little too smartly. Her intellect was nothing to
boast of, and her literary knowledge very doubtful. Literary patronage
was, however, with her as much a mania as was the love of gorgeous
clothes. Many books and translations were dedicated to her by her
proteges, and a few of these talented individuals had published some of
their own letters to her, upon very weighty subjects.

This, then, was the society that the prince accepted at once as true
coin, as pure gold without alloy.

It so happened, however, that on this particular evening all these good
people were in excellent humour and highly pleased with themselves.
Every one of them felt that they were doing the Epanchins the greatest
possible honour by their presence. But alas! the prince never suspected
any such subtleties! For instance, he had no suspicion of the fact that
the Epanchins, having in their mind so important a step as the marriage
of their daughter, would never think of presuming to take it without
having previously "shown off" the proposed husband to the dignitary--the
recognized patron of the family. The latter, too, though he would
probably have received news of a great disaster to the Epanchin family
with perfect composure, would nevertheless have considered it a personal
offence if they had dared to marry their daughter without his advice, or
we might almost say, his leave.

The amiable and undoubtedly witty Prince N. could not but feel that
he was as a sun, risen for one night only to shine upon the Epanchin
drawing-room. He accounted them immeasurably his inferiors, and it was
this feeling which caused his special amiability and delightful ease and
grace towards them. He knew very well that he must tell some story this
evening for the edification of the company, and led up to it with the
inspiration of anticipatory triumph.

The prince, when he heard the story afterwards, felt that he had never
yet come across so wonderful a humorist, or such remarkable brilliancy
as was shown by this man; and yet if he had only known it, this story
was the oldest, stalest, and most worn-out yarn, and every drawing-room
in town was sick to death of it. It was only in the innocent Epanchin
household that it passed for a new and brilliant tale--as a sudden and
striking reminiscence of a splendid and talented man.

Even the German poet, though as amiable as possible, felt that he was
doing the house the greatest of honours by his presence in it.

But the prince only looked at the bright side; he did not turn the coat
and see the shabby lining.

Aglaya had not foreseen that particular calamity. She herself looked
wonderfully beautiful this evening. All three sisters were dressed very
tastefully, and their hair was done with special care.

Aglaya sat next to Evgenie Pavlovitch, and laughed and talked to him
with an unusual display of friendliness. Evgenie himself behaved rather
more sedately than usual, probably out of respect to the dignitary.
Evgenie had been known in society for a long while. He had appeared at
the Epanchins' today with crape on his hat, and Princess Bielokonski had
commended this action on his part. Not every society man would have worn
crape for "such an uncle." Lizabetha Prokofievna had liked it also, but
was too preoccupied to take much notice. The prince remarked that Aglaya
looked attentively at him two or three times, and seemed to be satisfied
with his behaviour.

Little by little he became very happy indeed. All his late anxieties and
apprehensions (after his conversation with Lebedeff) now appeared like
so many bad dreams--impossible, and even laughable.

He did not speak much, only answering such questions as were put to him,
and gradually settled down into unbroken silence, listening to what went
on, and steeped in perfect satisfaction and contentment.

Little by little a sort of inspiration, however, began to stir within
him, ready to spring into life at the right moment. When he did begin
to speak, it was accidentally, in response to a question, and apparently
without any special object.

VII.

WHILE he feasted his eyes upon Aglaya, as she talked merrily with
Evgenie and Prince N., suddenly the old anglomaniac, who was talking to
the dignitary in another corner of the room, apparently telling him a
story about something or other--suddenly this gentleman pronounced
the name of "Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff" aloud. The prince quickly
turned towards him, and listened.

The conversation had been on the subject of land, and the present
disorders, and there must have been something amusing said, for the old
man had begun to laugh at his companion's heated expressions.

The latter was describing in eloquent words how, in consequence of
recent legislation, he was obliged to sell a beautiful estate in the N.
province, not because he wanted ready money--in fact, he was obliged
to sell it at half its value. "To avoid another lawsuit about the
Pavlicheff estate, I ran away," he said. "With a few more inheritances
of that kind I should soon be ruined!"

At this point General Epanchin, noticing how interested Muishkin had
become in the conversation, said to him, in a low tone:

"That gentleman--Ivan Petrovitch--is a relation of your late friend, Mr.
Pavlicheff. You wanted to find some of his relations, did you not?"

The general, who had been talking to his chief up to this moment, had
observed the prince's solitude and silence, and was anxious to draw him
into the conversation, and so introduce him again to the notice of some
of the important personages.

"Lef Nicolaievitch was a ward of Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, after
the death of his own parents," he remarked, meeting Ivan Petrovitch's
eye.

"Very happy to meet him, I'm sure," remarked the latter. "I remember
Lef Nicolaievitch well. When General Epanchin introduced us just now,
I recognized you at once, prince. You are very little changed, though
I saw you last as a child of some ten or eleven years old. There was
something in your features, I suppose, that--"

"You saw me as a child!" exclaimed the prince, with surprise.

"Oh! yes, long ago," continued Ivan Petrovitch, "while you were living
with my cousin at Zlatoverhoff. You don't remember me? No, I dare
say you don't; you had some malady at the time, I remember. It was so
serious that I was surprised--"

"No; I remember nothing!" said the prince. A few more words of
explanation followed, words which were spoken without the smallest
excitement by his companion, but which evoked the greatest agitation in
the prince; and it was discovered that two old ladies to whose care the
prince had been left by Pavlicheff, and who lived at Zlatoverhoff, were
also relations of Ivan Petrovitch.

The latter had no idea and could give no information as to why
Pavlicheff had taken so great an interest in the little prince, his
ward.

"In point of fact I don't think I thought much about it," said the old
fellow. He seemed to have a wonderfully good memory, however, for he
told the prince all about the two old ladies, Pavlicheff's cousins, who
had taken care of him, and whom, he declared, he had taken to task
for being too severe with the prince as a small sickly boy--the elder
sister, at least; the younger had been kind, he recollected. They
both now lived in another province, on a small estate left to them by
Pavlicheff. The prince listened to all this with eyes sparkling with
emotion and delight.

He declared with unusual warmth that he would never forgive himself for
having travelled about in the central provinces during these last six
months without having hunted up his two old friends.

He declared, further, that he had intended to go every day, but had
always been prevented by circumstances; but that now he would promise
himself the pleasure--however far it was, he would find them out. And so
Ivan Petrovitch REALLY knew Natalia Nikitishna!--what a saintly nature
was hers!--and Martha Nikitishna! Ivan Petrovitch must excuse him,
but really he was not quite fair on dear old Martha. She was severe,
perhaps; but then what else could she be with such a little idiot as he
was then? (Ha, ha.) He really was an idiot then, Ivan Petrovitch must
know, though he might not believe it. (Ha, ha.) So he had really seen
him there! Good heavens! And was he really and truly and actually a
cousin of Pavlicheff's?

"I assure you of it," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, gazing amusedly at the
prince.

"Oh! I didn't say it because I DOUBT the fact, you know. (Ha, ha.)
How could I doubt such a thing? (Ha, ha, ha.) I made the remark
because--because Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff was such a splendid man,
don't you see! Such a high-souled man, he really was, I assure you."

The prince did not exactly pant for breath, but he "seemed almost
to CHOKE out of pure simplicity and goodness of heart," as Adelaida
expressed it, on talking the party over with her fiance, the Prince S.,
next morning.

"But, my goodness me," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, "why can't I be cousin
to even a splendid man?"

"Oh, dear!" cried the prince, confused, trying to hurry his words
out, and growing more and more eager every moment: "I've gone and said
another stupid thing. I don't know what to say. I--I didn't mean that,
you know--I--I--he really was such a splendid man, wasn't he?"

The prince trembled all over. Why was he so agitated? Why had he flown
into such transports of delight without any apparent reason? He had far
outshot the measure of joy and emotion consistent with the occasion. Why
this was it would be difficult to say.

He seemed to feel warmly and deeply grateful to someone for something or
other--perhaps to Ivan Petrovitch; but likely enough to all the guests,
individually, and collectively. He was much too happy.

Ivan Petrovitch began to stare at him with some surprise; the dignitary,
too, looked at him with considerable attention; Princess Bielokonski
glared at him angrily, and compressed her lips. Prince N., Evgenie,
Prince S., and the girls, all broke off their own conversations and
listened. Aglaya seemed a little startled; as for Lizabetha Prokofievna,
her heart sank within her.

This was odd of Lizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters. They had
themselves decided that it would be better if the prince did not talk
all the evening. Yet seeing him sitting silent and alone, but perfectly
happy, they had been on the point of exerting themselves to draw him
into one of the groups of talkers around the room. Now that he was in
the midst of a talk they became more than ever anxious and perturbed.

"That he was a splendid man is perfectly true; you are quite right,"
repeated Ivan Petrovitch, but seriously this time. "He was a fine and a
worthy fellow--worthy, one may say, of the highest respect," he added,
more and more seriously at each pause; "and it is agreeable to see, on
your part, such--"

"Wasn't it this same Pavlicheff about whom there was a strange story in
connection with some abbot? I don't remember who the abbot was, but I
remember at one time everybody was talking about it," remarked the old
dignitary.

"Yes--Abbot Gurot, a Jesuit," said Ivan Petrovitch. "Yes, that's the
sort of thing our best men are apt to do. A man of rank, too, and
rich--a man who, if he had continued to serve, might have done anything;
and then to throw up the service and everything else in order to go over
to Roman Catholicism and turn Jesuit--openly, too--almost triumphantly.
By Jove! it was positively a mercy that he died when he did--it was
indeed--everyone said so at the time."

The prince was beside himself.

"Pavlicheff?--Pavlicheff turned Roman Catholic? Impossible!" he cried,
in horror.

"H'm! impossible is rather a strong word," said Ivan Petrovitch. "You
must allow, my dear prince... However, of course you value the memory of
the deceased so very highly; and he certainly was the kindest of men;
to which fact, by the way, I ascribe, more than to anything else, the
success of the abbot in influencing his religious convictions. But you
may ask me, if you please, how much trouble and worry I, personally,
had over that business, and especially with this same Gurot! Would you
believe it," he continued, addressing the dignitary, "they actually
tried to put in a claim under the deceased's will, and I had to resort
to the very strongest measures in order to bring them to their senses?
I assure you they knew their cue, did these gentlemen--wonderful! Thank
goodness all this was in Moscow, and I got the Court, you know, to help
me, and we soon brought them to their senses.

"You wouldn't believe how you have pained and astonished me," cried the
prince.

"Very sorry; but in point of fact, you know, it was all nonsense and
would have ended in smoke, as usual--I'm sure of that. Last year,"--he
turned to the old man again,--"Countess K. joined some Roman Convent
abroad. Our people never seem to be able to offer any resistance so soon
as they get into the hands of these--intriguers--especially abroad."

"That is all thanks to our lassitude, I think," replied the old man,
with authority. "And then their way of preaching; they have a skilful
manner of doing it! And they know how to startle one, too. I got quite
a fright myself in '32, in Vienna, I assure you; but I didn't cave in to
them, I ran away instead, ha, ha!"

"Come, come, I've always heard that you ran away with the beautiful
Countess Levitsky that time--throwing up everything in order to do
it--and not from the Jesuits at all," said Princess Bielokonski,
suddenly.

"Well, yes--but we call it from the Jesuits, you know; it comes to
the same thing," laughed the old fellow, delighted with the pleasant
recollection.

"You seem to be very religious," he continued, kindly, addressing the
prince, "which is a thing one meets so seldom nowadays among young
people."

The prince was listening open-mouthed, and still in a condition of
excited agitation. The old man was evidently interested in him, and
anxious to study him more closely.

"Pavlicheff was a man of bright intellect and a good Christian, a
sincere Christian," said the prince, suddenly. "How could he possibly
embrace a faith which is unchristian? Roman Catholicism is, so to speak,
simply the same thing as unchristianity," he added with flashing eyes,
which seemed to take in everybody in the room.

"Come, that's a little TOO strong, isn't it?" murmured the old man,
glancing at General Epanchin in surprise.

"How do you make out that the Roman Catholic religion is UNCHRISTIAN?
What is it, then?" asked Ivan Petrovitch, turning to the prince.

"It is not a Christian religion, in the first place," said the latter,
in extreme agitation, quite out of proportion to the necessity of the
moment. "And in the second place, Roman Catholicism is, in my opinion,
worse than Atheism itself. Yes--that is my opinion. Atheism only
preaches a negation, but Romanism goes further; it preaches a
disfigured, distorted Christ--it preaches Anti-Christ--I assure you, I
swear it! This is my own personal conviction, and it has long distressed
me. The Roman Catholic believes that the Church on earth cannot stand
without universal temporal Power. He cries 'non possumus!' In my
opinion the Roman Catholic religion is not a faith at all, but simply a
continuation of the Roman Empire, and everything is subordinated to
this idea--beginning with faith. The Pope has seized territories and an
earthly throne, and has held them with the sword. And so the thing has
gone on, only that to the sword they have added lying, intrigue, deceit,
fanaticism, superstition, swindling;--they have played fast and loose
with the most sacred and sincere feelings of men;--they have exchanged
everything--everything for money, for base earthly POWER! And is this
not the teaching of Anti-Christ? How could the upshot of all this
be other than Atheism? Atheism is the child of Roman Catholicism--it
proceeded from these Romans themselves, though perhaps they would not
believe it. It grew and fattened on hatred of its parents; it is the
progeny of their lies and spiritual feebleness. Atheism! In our country
it is only among the upper classes that you find unbelievers; men who
have lost the root or spirit of their faith; but abroad whole masses of
the people are beginning to profess unbelief--at first because of
the darkness and lies by which they were surrounded; but now out of
fanaticism, out of loathing for the Church and Christianity!"

The prince paused to get breath. He had spoken with extraordinary
rapidity, and was very pale.

All present interchanged glances, but at last the old dignitary burst
out laughing frankly. Prince N. took out his eye-glass to have a good
look at the speaker. The German poet came out of his corner and crept
nearer to the table, with a spiteful smile.

"You exaggerate the matter very much," said Ivan Petrovitch, with rather
a bored air. "There are, in the foreign Churches, many representatives
of their faith who are worthy of respect and esteem."

"Oh, but I did not speak of individual representatives. I was merely
talking about Roman Catholicism, and its essence--of Rome itself. A
Church can never entirely disappear; I never hinted at that!"

"Agreed that all this may be true; but we need not discuss a subject
which belongs to the domain of theology."

"Oh, no; oh, no! Not to theology alone, I assure you! Why, Socialism is
the progeny of Romanism and of the Romanistic spirit. It and its brother
Atheism proceed from Despair in opposition to Catholicism. It seeks to
replace in itself the moral power of religion, in order to appease the
spiritual thirst of parched humanity and save it; not by Christ, but
by force. 'Don't dare to believe in God, don't dare to possess any
individuality, any property! Fraternite ou la Mort; two million heads.
'By their works ye shall know them'--we are told. And we must not
suppose that all this is harmless and without danger to ourselves. Oh,
no; we must resist, and quickly, quickly! We must let out Christ shine
forth upon the Western nations, our Christ whom we have preserved
intact, and whom they have never known. Not as slaves, allowing
ourselves to be caught by the hooks of the Jesuits, but carrying our
Russian civilization to THEM, we must stand before them, not letting it
be said among us that their preaching is 'skilful,' as someone expressed
it just now."

"But excuse me, excuse me;" cried Ivan Petrovitch considerably
disturbed, and looking around uneasily. "Your ideas are, of course, most
praiseworthy, and in the highest degree patriotic; but you exaggerate
the matter terribly. It would be better if we dropped the subject."

"No, sir, I do not exaggerate, I understate the matter, if anything,
undoubtedly understate it; simply because I cannot express myself as I
should like, but--"

"Allow me!"

The prince was silent. He sat straight up in his chair and gazed
fervently at Ivan Petrovitch.

"It seems to me that you have been too painfully impressed by the news
of what happened to your good benefactor," said the old dignitary,
kindly, and with the utmost calmness of demeanour. "You are excitable,
perhaps as the result of your solitary life. If you would make up your
mind to live more among your fellows in society, I trust, I am sure,
that the world would be glad to welcome you, as a remarkable young man;
and you would soon find yourself able to look at things more calmly. You
would see that all these things are much simpler than you think; and,
besides, these rare cases come about, in my opinion, from ennui and from
satiety."

"Exactly, exactly! That is a true thought!" cried the prince. "From
ennui, from our ennui but not from satiety! Oh, no, you are wrong there!
Say from THIRST if you like; the thirst of fever! And please do not
suppose that this is so small a matter that we may have a laugh at it
and dismiss it; we must be able to foresee our disasters and arm against
them. We Russians no sooner arrive at the brink of the water, and
realize that we are really at the brink, than we are so delighted with
the outlook that in we plunge and swim to the farthest point we can
see. Why is this? You say you are surprised at Pavlicheff's action; you
ascribe it to madness, to kindness of heart, and what not, but it is not
so.

"Our Russian intensity not only astonishes ourselves; all Europe wonders
at our conduct in such cases! For, if one of us goes over to Roman
Catholicism, he is sure to become a Jesuit at once, and a rabid one into
the bargain. If one of us becomes an Atheist, he must needs begin to
insist on the prohibition of faith in God by force, that is, by the
sword. Why is this? Why does he then exceed all bounds at once? Because
he has found land at last, the fatherland that he sought in vain before;
and, because his soul is rejoiced to find it, he throws himself upon it
and kisses it! Oh, it is not from vanity alone, it is not from feelings
of vanity that Russians become Atheists and Jesuits! But from spiritual
thirst, from anguish of longing for higher things, for dry firm land,
for foothold on a fatherland which they never believed in because they
never knew it. It is easier for a Russian to become an Atheist, than for
any other nationality in the world. And not only does a Russian 'become
an Atheist,' but he actually BELIEVES IN Atheism, just as though he
had found a new faith, not perceiving that he has pinned his faith to
a negation. Such is our anguish of thirst! 'Whoso has no country has no
God.' That is not my own expression; it is the expression of a merchant,
one of the Old Believers, whom I once met while travelling. He did not
say exactly these words. I think his expression was:

"'Whoso forsakes his country forsakes his God.'

"But let these thirsty Russian souls find, like Columbus' discoverers, a
new world; let them find the Russian world, let them search and discover
all the gold and treasure that lies hid in the bosom of their own land!
Show them the restitution of lost humanity, in the future, by Russian
thought alone, and by means of the God and of the Christ of our Russian
faith, and you will see how mighty and just and wise and good a giant
will rise up before the eyes of the astonished and frightened world;
astonished because they expect nothing but the sword from us, because
they think they will get nothing out of us but barbarism. This has
been the case up to now, and the longer matters go on as they are now
proceeding, the more clear will be the truth of what I say; and I--"

But at this moment something happened which put a most unexpected end to
the orator's speech. All this heated tirade, this outflow of passionate
words and ecstatic ideas which seemed to hustle and tumble over each
other as they fell from his lips, bore evidence of some unusually
disturbed mental condition in the young fellow who had "boiled over" in
such a remarkable manner, without any apparent reason.

Of those who were present, such as knew the prince listened to his
outburst in a state of alarm, some with a feeling of mortification. It
was so unlike his usual timid self-constraint; so inconsistent with his
usual taste and tact, and with his instinctive feeling for the higher
proprieties. They could not understand the origin of the outburst; it
could not be simply the news of Pavlicheff's perversion. By the ladies
the prince was regarded as little better than a lunatic, and Princess
Bielokonski admitted afterwards that "in another minute she would have
bolted."

The two old gentlemen looked quite alarmed. The old general (Epanchin's
chief) sat and glared at the prince in severe displeasure. The colonel
sat immovable. Even the German poet grew a little pale, though he wore
his usual artificial smile as he looked around to see what the others
would do.

In point of fact it is quite possible that the matter would have ended
in a very commonplace and natural way in a few minutes. The undoubtedly
astonished, but now more collected, General Epanchin had several times
endeavoured to interrupt the prince, and not having succeeded he was now
preparing to take firmer and more vigorous measures to attain his end.
In another minute or two he would probably have made up his mind to lead
the prince quietly out of the room, on the plea of his being ill (and it
was more than likely that the general was right in his belief that the
prince WAS actually ill), but it so happened that destiny had something
different in store.

At the beginning of the evening, when the prince first came into the
room, he had sat down as far as possible from the Chinese vase which
Aglaya had spoken of the day before.

Will it be believed that, after Aglaya's alarming words, an ineradicable
conviction had taken possession of his mind that, however he might try
to avoid this vase next day, he must certainly break it? But so it was.

During the evening other impressions began to awaken in his mind, as
we have seen, and he forgot his presentiment. But when Pavlicheff was
mentioned and the general introduced him to Ivan Petrovitch, he had
changed his place, and went over nearer to the table; when, it so
happened, he took the chair nearest to the beautiful vase, which stood
on a pedestal behind him, just about on a level with his elbow.

As he spoke his last words he had risen suddenly from his seat with a
wave of his arm, and there was a general cry of horror.

The huge vase swayed backwards and forwards; it seemed to be uncertain
whether or no to topple over on to the head of one of the old men,
but eventually determined to go the other way, and came crashing over
towards the German poet, who darted out of the way in terror.

The crash, the cry, the sight of the fragments of valuable china
covering the carpet, the alarm of the company--what all this meant
to the poor prince it would be difficult to convey to the mind of the
reader, or for him to imagine.

But one very curious fact was that all the shame and vexation and
mortification which he felt over the accident were less powerful than
the deep impression of the almost supernatural truth of his premonition.
He stood still in alarm--in almost superstitious alarm, for a moment;
then all mists seemed to clear away from his eyes; he was conscious of
nothing but light and joy and ecstasy; his breath came and went; but
the moment passed. Thank God it was not that! He drew a long breath and
looked around.

For some minutes he did not seem to comprehend the excitement around
him; that is, he comprehended it and saw everything, but he stood aside,
as it were, like someone invisible in a fairy tale, as though he had
nothing to do with what was going on, though it pleased him to take an
interest in it.

He saw them gather up the broken bits of china; he heard the loud
talking of the guests and observed how pale Aglaya looked, and how very
strangely she was gazing at him. There was no hatred in her expression,
and no anger whatever. It was full of alarm for him, and sympathy and
affection, while she looked around at the others with flashing, angry
eyes. His heart filled with a sweet pain as he gazed at her.

At length he observed, to his amazement, that all had taken their seats
again, and were laughing and talking as though nothing had happened.
Another minute and the laughter grew louder--they were laughing at him,
at his dumb stupor--laughing kindly and merrily. Several of them
spoke to him, and spoke so kindly and cordially, especially Lizabetha
Prokofievna--she was saying the kindest possible things to him.

Suddenly he became aware that General Epanchin was tapping him on the
shoulder; Ivan Petrovitch was laughing too, but still more kind and
sympathizing was the old dignitary. He took the prince by the hand and
pressed it warmly; then he patted it, and quietly urged him to recollect
himself--speaking to him exactly as he would have spoken to a little
frightened child, which pleased the prince wonderfully; and next seated
him beside himself.

The prince gazed into his face with pleasure, but still seemed to have
no power to speak. His breath failed him. The old man's face pleased him
greatly.

"Do you really forgive me?" he said at last. "And--and Lizabetha
Prokofievna too?" The laugh increased, tears came into the prince's
eyes, he could not believe in all this kindness--he was enchanted.

"The vase certainly was a very beautiful one. I remember it here for
fifteen years--yes, quite that!" remarked Ivan Petrovitch.

"Oh, what a dreadful calamity! A wretched vase smashed, and a man half
dead with remorse about it," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, loudly. "What
made you so dreadfully startled, Lef Nicolaievitch?" she added, a little
timidly. "Come, my dear boy! cheer up. You really alarm me, taking the
accident so to heart."

"Do you forgive me all--ALL, besides the vase, I mean?" said the prince,
rising from his seat once more, but the old gentleman caught his hand
and drew him down again--he seemed unwilling to let him go.

"C'est tres-curieux et c'est tres-serieux," he whispered across the
table to Ivan Petrovitch, rather loudly. Probably the prince heard him.

"So that I have not offended any of you? You will not believe how happy
I am to be able to think so. It is as it should be. As if I COULD offend
anyone here! I should offend you again by even suggesting such a thing."

"Calm yourself, my dear fellow. You are exaggerating again; you really
have no occasion to be so grateful to us. It is a feeling which does you
great credit, but an exaggeration, for all that."

"I am not exactly thanking you, I am only feeling a growing admiration
for you--it makes me happy to look at you. I dare say I am speaking very
foolishly, but I must speak--I must explain, if it be out of nothing
better than self-respect."

All he said and did was abrupt, confused, feverish--very likely the
words he spoke, as often as not, were not those he wished to say. He
seemed to inquire whether he MIGHT speak. His eyes lighted on Princess
Bielokonski.

"All right, my friend, talk away, talk away!" she remarked. "Only don't
lose your breath; you were in such a hurry when you began, and look what
you've come to now! Don't be afraid of speaking--all these ladies
and gentlemen have seen far stranger people than yourself; you don't
astonish THEM. You are nothing out-of-the-way remarkable, you know.
You've done nothing but break a vase, and give us all a fright."

The prince listened, smiling.

"Wasn't it you," he said, suddenly turning to the old gentleman, "who
saved the student Porkunoff and a clerk called Shoabrin from being sent
to Siberia, two or three months since?"

The old dignitary blushed a little, and murmured that the prince had
better not excite himself further.

"And I have heard of YOU," continued the prince, addressing Ivan
Petrovitch, "that when some of your villagers were burned out you gave
them wood to build up their houses again, though they were no longer
your serfs and had behaved badly towards you."

"Oh, come, come! You are exaggerating," said Ivan Petrovitch, beaming
with satisfaction, all the same. He was right, however, in this
instance, for the report had reached the prince's ears in an incorrect
form.

"And you, princess," he went on, addressing Princess Bielokonski, "was
it not you who received me in Moscow, six months since, as kindly as
though I had been your own son, in response to a letter from Lizabetha
Prokofievna; and gave me one piece of advice, again as to your own son,
which I shall never forget? Do you remember?"

"What are you making such a fuss about?" said the old lady, with
annoyance. "You are a good fellow, but very silly. One gives you a
halfpenny, and you are as grateful as though one had saved your life.
You think this is praiseworthy on your part, but it is not--it is not,
indeed."

She seemed to be very angry, but suddenly burst out laughing, quite
good-humouredly.

Lizabetha Prokofievna's face brightened up, too; so did that of General
Epanchin.

"I told you Lef Nicolaievitch was a man--a man--if only he would not
be in such a hurry, as the princess remarked," said the latter, with
delight.

Aglaya alone seemed sad and depressed; her face was flushed, perhaps
with indignation.

"He really is very charming," whispered the old dignitary to Ivan
Petrovitch.

"I came into this room with anguish in my heart," continued the prince,
with ever-growing agitation, speaking quicker and quicker, and with
increasing strangeness. "I--I was afraid of you all, and afraid of
myself. I was most afraid of myself. When I returned to Petersburg, I
promised myself to make a point of seeing our greatest men, and members
of our oldest families--the old families like my own. I am now among
princes like myself, am I not? I wished to know you, and it was
necessary, very, very necessary. I had always heard so much that was
evil said of you all--more evil than good; as to how small and petty
were your interests, how absurd your habits, how shallow your education,
and so on. There is so much written and said about you! I came here
today with anxious curiosity; I wished to see for myself and form my
own convictions as to whether it were true that the whole of this upper
stratum of Russian society is WORTHLESS, has outlived its time, has
existed too long, and is only fit to die--and yet is dying with petty,
spiteful warring against that which is destined to supersede it and take
its place--hindering the Coming Men, and knowing not that itself is in
a dying condition. I did not fully believe in this view even before, for
there never was such a class among us--excepting perhaps at court, by
accident--or by uniform; but now there is not even that, is there? It
has vanished, has it not?"

"No, not a bit of it," said Ivan Petrovitch, with a sarcastic laugh.

"Good Lord, he's off again!" said Princess Bielokonski, impatiently.

"Laissez-le dire! He is trembling all over," said the old man, in a
warning whisper.

The prince certainly was beside himself.

"Well? What have I seen?" he continued. "I have seen men of graceful
simplicity of intellect; I have seen an old man who is not above
speaking kindly and even LISTENING to a boy like myself; I see before
me persons who can understand, who can forgive--kind, good Russian
hearts--hearts almost as kind and cordial as I met abroad. Imagine how
delighted I must have been, and how surprised! Oh, let me express
this feeling! I have so often heard, and I have even believed, that
in society there was nothing but empty forms, and that reality had
vanished; but I now see for myself that this can never be the case HERE,
among us--it may be the order elsewhere, but not in Russia. Surely you
are not all Jesuits and deceivers! I heard Prince N.'s story just now.
Was it not simple-minded, spontaneous humour? Could such words come from
the lips of a man who is dead?--a man whose heart and talents are dried
up? Could dead men and women have treated me so kindly as you have all
been treating me to-day? Is there not material for the future in all
this--for hope? Can such people fail to UNDERSTAND? Can such men fall
away from reality?"

"Once more let us beg you to be calm, my dear boy. We'll talk of all
this another time--I shall do so with the greatest pleasure, for one,"
said the old dignitary, with a smile.

Ivan Petrovitch grunted and twisted round in his chair. General Epanchin
moved nervously. The latter's chief had started a conversation with the
wife of the dignitary, and took no notice whatever of the prince, but
the old lady very often glanced at him, and listened to what he was
saying.

"No, I had better speak," continued the prince, with a new outburst
of feverish emotion, and turning towards the old man with an air of
confidential trustfulness. "Yesterday, Aglaya Ivanovna forbade me
to talk, and even specified the particular subjects I must not touch
upon--she knows well enough that I am odd when I get upon these matters.
I am nearly twenty-seven years old, and yet I know I am little better
than a child. I have no right to express my ideas, and said so long ago.
Only in Moscow, with Rogojin, did I ever speak absolutely freely! He and
I read Pushkin together--all his works. Rogojin knew nothing of Pushkin,
had not even heard his name. I am always afraid of spoiling a great
Thought or Idea by my absurd manner. I have no eloquence, I know. I
always make the wrong gestures--inappropriate gestures--and therefore
I degrade the Thought, and raise a laugh instead of doing my subject
justice. I have no sense of proportion either, and that is the chief
thing. I know it would be much better if I were always to sit still and
say nothing. When I do so, I appear to be quite a sensible sort of a
person, and what's more, I think about things. But now I must speak; it
is better that I should. I began to speak because you looked so kindly
at me; you have such a beautiful face. I promised Aglaya Ivanovna
yesterday that I would not speak all the evening."

"Really?" said the old man, smiling.

"But, at times, I can't help thinking that I am wrong in feeling so
about it, you know. Sincerity is more important than elocution, isn't
it?"

"Sometimes."

"I want to explain all to you--everything--everything! I know you think
me Utopian, don't you--an idealist? Oh, no! I'm not, indeed--my ideas
are all so simple. You don't believe me? You are smiling. Do you know,
I am sometimes very wicked--for I lose my faith? This evening as I came
here, I thought to myself, 'What shall I talk about? How am I to begin,
so that they may be able to understand partially, at all events?' How
afraid I was--dreadfully afraid! And yet, how COULD I be afraid--was it
not shameful of me? Was I afraid of finding a bottomless abyss of empty
selfishness? Ah! that's why I am so happy at this moment, because I find
there is no bottomless abyss at all--but good, healthy material, full of
life.

"It is not such a very dreadful circumstance that we are odd people, is
it? For we really are odd, you know--careless, reckless, easily wearied
of anything. We don't look thoroughly into matters--don't care to
understand things. We are all like this--you and I, and all of them!
Why, here are you, now--you are not a bit angry with me for calling you
odd,' are you? And, if so, surely there is good material in you? Do you
know, I sometimes think it is a good thing to be odd. We can forgive
one another more easily, and be more humble. No one can begin by being
perfect--there is much one cannot understand in life at first. In order
to attain to perfection, one must begin by failing to understand much.
And if we take in knowledge too quickly, we very likely are not taking
it in at all. I say all this to you--you who by this time understand so
much--and doubtless have failed to understand so much, also. I am not
afraid of you any longer. You are not angry that a mere boy should say
such words to you, are you? Of course not! You know how to forget and to
forgive. You are laughing, Ivan Petrovitch? You think I am a champion
of other classes of people--that I am THEIR advocate, a democrat, and
an orator of Equality?" The prince laughed hysterically; he had several
times burst into these little, short nervous laughs. "Oh, no--it is for
you, for myself, and for all of us together, that I am alarmed. I am a
prince of an old family myself, and I am sitting among my peers; and I
am talking like this in the hope of saving us all; in the hope that our
class will not disappear altogether--into the darkness--unguessing its
danger--blaming everything around it, and losing ground every day. Why
should we disappear and give place to others, when we may still, if
we choose, remain in the front rank and lead the battle? Let us be
servants, that we may become lords in due season!"

He tried to get upon his feet again, but the old man still restrained
him, gazing at him with increasing perturbation as he went on.

"Listen--I know it is best not to speak! It is best simply to give a
good example--simply to begin the work. I have done this--I have
begun, and--and--oh! CAN anyone be unhappy, really? Oh! what does grief
matter--what does misfortune matter, if one knows how to be happy? Do
you know, I cannot understand how anyone can pass by a green tree, and
not feel happy only to look at it! How anyone can talk to a man and not
feel happy in loving him! Oh, it is my own fault that I cannot express
myself well enough! But there are lovely things at every step I
take--things which even the most miserable man must recognize as
beautiful. Look at a little child--look at God's day-dawn--look at the
grass growing--look at the eyes that love you, as they gaze back into
your eyes!"

He had risen, and was speaking standing up. The old gentleman was
looking at him now in unconcealed alarm. Lizabetha Prokofievna wrung her
hands. "Oh, my God!" she cried. She had guessed the state of the case
before anyone else.

Aglaya rushed quickly up to him, and was just in time to receive him in
her arms, and to hear with dread and horror that awful, wild cry as he
fell writhing to the ground.

There he lay on the carpet, and someone quickly placed a cushion under
his head.

No one had expected this.

In a quarter of an hour or so Prince N. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and the
old dignitary were hard at work endeavouring to restore the harmony
of the evening, but it was of no avail, and very soon after the guests
separated and went their ways.

A great deal of sympathy was expressed; a considerable amount of advice
was volunteered; Ivan Petrovitch expressed his opinion that the young
man was "a Slavophile, or something of that sort"; but that it was not a
dangerous development. The old dignitary said nothing.

True enough, most of the guests, next day and the day after, were not
in very good humour. Ivan Petrovitch was a little offended, but not
seriously so. General Epanchin's chief was rather cool towards him for
some while after the occurrence. The old dignitary, as patron of the
family, took the opportunity of murmuring some kind of admonition to the
general, and added, in flattering terms, that he was most interested
in Aglaya's future. He was a man who really did possess a kind heart,
although his interest in the prince, in the earlier part of the evening,
was due, among other reasons, to the latter's connection with Nastasia
Philipovna, according to popular report. He had heard a good deal of
this story here and there, and was greatly interested in it, so much so
that he longed to ask further questions about it.

Princess Bielokonski, as she drove away on this eventful evening, took
occasion to say to Lizabetha Prokofievna:

"Well--he's a good match--and a bad one; and if you want my opinion,
more bad than good. You can see for yourself the man is an invalid."

Lizabetha therefore decided that the prince was impossible as a husband
for Aglaya; and during the ensuing night she made a vow that never while
she lived should he marry Aglaya. With this resolve firmly impressed
upon her mind, she awoke next day; but during the morning, after her
early lunch, she fell into a condition of remarkable inconsistency.

In reply to a very guarded question of her sisters', Aglaya had answered
coldly, but exceedingly haughtily:

"I have never given him my word at all, nor have I ever counted him as
my future husband--never in my life. He is just as little to me as all
the rest."

Lizabetha Prokofievna suddenly flared up.

"I did not expect that of you, Aglaya," she said. "He is an impossible
husband for you,--I know it; and thank God that we agree upon that
point; but I did not expect to hear such words from you. I thought I
should hear a very different tone from you. I would have turned out
everyone who was in the room last night and kept him,--that's the sort
of man he is, in my opinion!"

Here she suddenly paused, afraid of what she had just said. But she
little knew how unfair she was to her daughter at that moment. It was
all settled in Aglaya's mind. She was only waiting for the hour that
would bring the matter to a final climax; and every hint, every careless
probing of her wound, did but further lacerate her heart.

VIII.

THIS same morning dawned for the prince pregnant with no less painful
presentiments,--which fact his physical state was, of course, quite
enough to account for; but he was so indefinably melancholy,--his
sadness could not attach itself to anything in particular, and this
tormented him more than anything else. Of course certain facts stood
before him, clear and painful, but his sadness went beyond all that he
could remember or imagine; he realized that he was powerless to console
himself unaided. Little by little he began to develop the expectation
that this day something important, something decisive, was to happen to
him.

His attack of yesterday had been a slight one. Excepting some little
heaviness in the head and pain in the limbs, he did not feel any
particular effects. His brain worked all right, though his soul was
heavy within him.

He rose late, and immediately upon waking remembered all about the
previous evening; he also remembered, though not quite so clearly, how,
half an hour after his fit, he had been carried home.

He soon heard that a messenger from the Epanchins' had already been to
inquire after him. At half-past eleven another arrived; and this pleased
him.

Vera Lebedeff was one of the first to come to see him and offer her
services. No sooner did she catch sight of him than she burst into
tears; but when he tried to soothe her she began to laugh. He was quite
struck by the girl's deep sympathy for him; he seized her hand and
kissed it. Vera flushed crimson.

"Oh, don't, don't!" she exclaimed in alarm, snatching her hand away. She
went hastily out of the room in a state of strange confusion.

Lebedeff also came to see the prince, in a great hurry to get away to
the "deceased," as he called General Ivolgin, who was alive still, but
very ill. Colia also turned up, and begged the prince for pity's sake to
tell him all he knew about his father which had been concealed from him
till now. He said he had found out nearly everything since yesterday;
the poor boy was in a state of deep affliction. With all the sympathy
which he could bring into play, the prince told Colia the whole story
without reserve, detailing the facts as clearly as he could. The
tale struck Colia like a thunderbolt. He could not speak. He listened
silently, and cried softly to himself the while. The prince perceived
that this was an impression which would last for the whole of the boy's
life. He made haste to explain his view of the matter, and pointed out
that the old man's approaching death was probably brought on by horror
at the thought of his action; and that it was not everyone who was
capable of such a feeling.

Colia's eyes flashed as he listened.

"Gania and Varia and Ptitsin are a worthless lot! I shall not quarrel
with them; but from this moment our feet shall not travel the same road.
Oh, prince, I have felt much that is quite new to me since yesterday!
It is a lesson for me. I shall now consider my mother as entirely my
responsibility; though she may be safe enough with Varia. Still, meat
and drink is not everything."

He jumped up and hurried off, remembering suddenly that he was wanted
at his father's bedside; but before he went out of the room he inquired
hastily after the prince's health, and receiving the latter's reply,
added:

"Isn't there something else, prince? I heard yesterday, but I have
no right to talk about this... If you ever want a true friend and
servant--neither you nor I are so very happy, are we?--come to me. I
won't ask you questions, though."

He ran off and left the prince more dejected than ever.

Everyone seemed to be speaking prophetically, hinting at some misfortune
or sorrow to come; they had all looked at him as though they knew
something which he did not know. Lebedeff had asked questions, Colia had
hinted, and Vera had shed tears. What was it?

At last, with a sigh of annoyance, he said to himself that it was
nothing but his own cursed sickly suspicion. His face lighted up with
joy when, at about two o'clock, he espied the Epanchins coming along to
pay him a short visit, "just for a minute." They really had only come
for a minute.

Lizabetha Prokofievna had announced, directly after lunch, that they
would all take a walk together. The information was given in the form of
a command, without explanation, drily and abruptly. All had issued forth
in obedience to the mandate; that is, the girls, mamma, and Prince S.
Lizabetha Prokofievna went off in a direction exactly contrary to the
usual one, and all understood very well what she was driving at, but
held their peace, fearing to irritate the good lady. She, as though
anxious to avoid any conversation, walked ahead, silent and alone. At
last Adelaida remarked that it was no use racing along at such a pace,
and that she could not keep up with her mother.

"Look here," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, turning round suddenly; "we are
passing his house. Whatever Aglaya may think, and in spite of anything
that may happen, he is not a stranger to us; besides which, he is ill
and in misfortune. I, for one, shall call in and see him. Let anyone
follow me who cares to."

Of course every one of them followed her.

The prince hastened to apologize, very properly, for yesterday's mishap
with the vase, and for the scene generally.

"Oh, that's nothing," replied Lizabetha; "I'm not sorry for the vase,
I'm sorry for you. H'm! so you can see that there was a 'scene,' can
you? Well, it doesn't matter much, for everyone must realize now that it
is impossible to be hard on you. Well, au revoir. I advise you to have
a walk, and then go to sleep again if you can. Come in as usual, if
you feel inclined; and be assured, once for all, whatever happens, and
whatever may have happened, you shall always remain the friend of the
family--mine, at all events. I can answer for myself."

In response to this challenge all the others chimed in and re-echoed
mamma's sentiments.

And so they took their departure; but in this hasty and kindly designed
visit there was hidden a fund of cruelty which Lizabetha Prokofievna
never dreamed of. In the words "as usual," and again in her added,
"mine, at all events," there seemed an ominous knell of some evil to
come.

The prince began to think of Aglaya. She had certainly given him a
wonderful smile, both at coming and again at leave-taking, but had not
said a word, not even when the others all professed their friendship for
him. She had looked very intently at him, but that was all. Her face had
been paler than usual; she looked as though she had slept badly.

The prince made up his mind that he would make a point of going there
"as usual," tonight, and looked feverishly at his watch.

Vera came in three minutes after the Epanchins had left. "Lef
Nicolaievitch," she said, "Aglaya Ivanovna has just given me a message
for you."

The prince trembled.

"Is it a note?"

"No, a verbal message; she had hardly time even for that. She begs you
earnestly not to go out of the house for a single moment all to-day,
until seven o'clock in the evening. It may have been nine; I didn't
quite hear."

"But--but, why is this? What does it mean?"

"I don't know at all; but she said I was to tell you particularly."

"Did she say that?"

"Not those very words. She only just had time to whisper as she went by;
but by the way she looked at me I knew it was important. She looked at
me in a way that made my heart stop beating."

The prince asked a few more questions, and though he learned nothing
else, he became more and more agitated.

Left alone, he lay down on the sofa, and began to think.

"Perhaps," he thought, "someone is to be with them until nine tonight
and she is afraid that I may come and make a fool of myself again, in
public." So he spent his time longing for the evening and looking at his
watch. But the clearing-up of the mystery came long before the evening,
and came in the form of a new and agonizing riddle.

Half an hour after the Epanchins had gone, Hippolyte arrived, so tired
that, almost unconscious, he sank into a chair, and broke into such a
fit of coughing that he could not stop. He coughed till the blood came.
His eyes glittered, and two red spots on his cheeks grew brighter and
brighter. The prince murmured something to him, but Hippolyte only
signed that he must be left alone for a while, and sat silent. At last
he came to himself.

"I am off," he said, hoarsely, and with difficulty.

"Shall I see you home?" asked the prince, rising from his seat, but
suddenly stopping short as he remembered Aglaya's prohibition against
leaving the house. Hippolyte laughed.

"I don't mean that I am going to leave your house," he continued,
still gasping and coughing. "On the contrary, I thought it absolutely
necessary to come and see you; otherwise I should not have troubled you.
I am off there, you know, and this time I believe, seriously, that I am
off! It's all over. I did not come here for sympathy, believe me. I lay
down this morning at ten o'clock with the intention of not rising again
before that time; but I thought it over and rose just once more in
order to come here; from which you may deduce that I had some reason for
wishing to come."

"It grieves me to see you so, Hippolyte. Why didn't you send me a
message? I would have come up and saved you this trouble."

"Well, well! Enough! You've pitied me, and that's all that good manners
exact. I forgot, how are you?"

"I'm all right; yesterday I was a little--"

"I know, I heard; the china vase caught it! I'm sorry I wasn't there.
I've come about something important. In the first place I had, the
pleasure of seeing Gavrila Ardalionovitch and Aglaya Ivanovna enjoying a
rendezvous on the green bench in the park. I was astonished to see what
a fool a man can look. I remarked upon the fact to Aglaya Ivanovna when
he had gone. I don't think anything ever surprises you, prince!" added
Hippolyte, gazing incredulously at the prince's calm demeanour. "To be
astonished by nothing is a sign, they say, of a great intellect. In my
opinion it would serve equally well as a sign of great foolishness. I
am not hinting about you; pardon me! I am very unfortunate today in my
expressions.

"I knew yesterday that Gavrila Ardalionovitch--" began the prince, and
paused in evident confusion, though Hippolyte had shown annoyance at his
betraying no surprise.

"You knew it? Come, that's news! But no--perhaps better not tell me. And
were you a witness of the meeting?"

"If you were there yourself you must have known that I was NOT there!"

"Oh! but you may have been sitting behind the bushes somewhere. However,
I am very glad, on your account, of course. I was beginning to be afraid
that Mr. Gania--might have the preference!"

"May I ask you, Hippolyte, not to talk of this subject? And not to use
such expressions?"

"Especially as you know all, eh?"

"You are wrong. I know scarcely anything, and Aglaya Ivanovna is aware
that I know nothing. I knew nothing whatever about this meeting. You say
there was a meeting. Very well; let's leave it so--"

"Why, what do you mean? You said you knew, and now suddenly you know
nothing! You say 'very well; let's leave it so.' But I say, don't be
so confiding, especially as you know nothing. You are confiding simply
BECAUSE you know nothing. But do you know what these good people have
in their minds' eye--Gania and his sister? Perhaps you are suspicious?
Well, well, I'll drop the subject!" he added, hastily, observing the
prince's impatient gesture. "But I've come to you on my own business;
I wish to make you a clear explanation. What a nuisance it is that one
cannot die without explanations! I have made such a quantity of them
already. Do you wish to hear what I have to say?"

"Speak away, I am listening."

"Very well, but I'll change my mind, and begin about Gania. Just fancy
to begin with, if you can, that I, too, was given an appointment at
the green bench today! However, I won't deceive you; I asked for the
appointment. I said I had a secret to disclose. I don't know whether I
came there too early, I think I must have; but scarcely had I sat down
beside Aglaya Ivanovna than I saw Gavrila Ardalionovitch and his sister
Varia coming along, arm in arm, just as though they were enjoying a
morning walk together. Both of them seemed very much astonished, not
to say disturbed, at seeing me; they evidently had not expected
the pleasure. Aglaya Ivanovna blushed up, and was actually a little
confused. I don't know whether it was merely because I was there, or
whether Gania's beauty was too much for her! But anyway, she turned
crimson, and then finished up the business in a very funny manner.
She jumped up from her seat, bowed back to Gania, smiled to Varia, and
suddenly observed: 'I only came here to express my gratitude for all
your kind wishes on my behalf, and to say that if I find I need your
services, believe me--' Here she bowed them away, as it were, and they
both marched off again, looking very foolish. Gania evidently could not
make head nor tail of the matter, and turned as red as a lobster; but
Varia understood at once that they must get away as quickly as they
could, so she dragged Gania away; she is a great deal cleverer than he
is. As for myself, I went there to arrange a meeting to be held between
Aglaya Ivanovna and Nastasia Philipovna."

"Nastasia Philipovna!" cried the prince.

"Aha! I think you are growing less cool, my friend, and are beginning
to be a trifle surprised, aren't you? I'm glad that you are not above
ordinary human feelings, for once. I'll console you a little now, after
your consternation. See what I get for serving a young and high-souled
maiden! This morning I received a slap in the face from the lady!"

"A--a moral one?" asked the prince, involuntarily.

"Yes--not a physical one! I don't suppose anyone--even a woman--would
raise a hand against me now. Even Gania would hesitate! I did think at
one time yesterday, that he would fly at me, though. I bet anything that
I know what you are thinking of now! You are thinking: 'Of course one
can't strike the little wretch, but one could suffocate him with a
pillow, or a wet towel, when he is asleep! One OUGHT to get rid of him
somehow.' I can see in your face that you are thinking that at this very
second."

"I never thought of such a thing for a moment," said the prince, with
disgust.

"I don't know--I dreamed last night that I was being suffocated with a
wet cloth by--somebody. I'll tell you who it was--Rogojin! What do you
think, can a man be suffocated with a wet cloth?"

"I don't know."

"I've heard so. Well, we'll leave that question just now. Why am I a
scandal-monger? Why did she call me a scandal-monger? And mind, AFTER
she had heard every word I had to tell her, and had asked all sorts of
questions besides--but such is the way of women. For HER sake I entered
into relations with Rogojin--an interesting man! At HER request I
arranged a personal interview between herself and Nastasia Philipovna.
Could she have been angry because I hinted that she was enjoying
Nastasia Philipovna's 'leavings'? Why, I have been impressing it upon
her all this while for her own good. Two letters have I written her in
that strain, and I began straight off today about its being humiliating
for her. Besides, the word 'leavings' is not my invention. At all
events, they all used it at Gania's, and she used it herself. So why am
I a scandal-monger? I see--I see you are tremendously amused, at this
moment! Probably you are laughing at me and fitting those silly lines to
my case--

"'Maybe sad Love upon his setting smiles, And with vain hopes his
farewell hour beguiles.

"Ha, ha, ha!"

Hippolyte suddenly burst into a fit of hysterical laughter, which turned
into a choking cough.

"Observe," he gasped, through his coughing, "what a fellow Gania is!
He talks about Nastasia's 'leavings,' but what does he want to take
himself?"

The prince sat silent for a long while. His mind was filled with dread
and horror.

"You spoke of a meeting with Nastasia Philipovna," he said at last, in a
low voice.

"Oh--come! Surely you must know that there is to be a meeting today
between Nastasia and Aglaya Ivanovna, and that Nastasia has been sent
for on purpose, through Rogojin, from St. Petersburg? It has been
brought about by invitation of Aglaya Ivanovna and my own efforts, and
Nastasia is at this moment with Rogojin, not far from here--at Dana
Alexeyevna's--that curious friend of hers; and to this questionable
house Aglaya Ivanovna is to proceed for a friendly chat with Nastasia
Philipovna, and for the settlement of several problems. They are going
to play at arithmetic--didn't you know about it? Word of honour?"

"It's a most improbable story."

"Oh, very well! if it's improbable--it is--that's all! And yet--where
should you have heard it? Though I must say, if a fly crosses the room
it's known all over the place here. However, I've warned you, and you
may be grateful to me. Well--au revoir--probably in the next world! One
more thing--don't think that I am telling you all this for your sake.
Oh, dear, no! Do you know that I dedicated my confession to Aglaya
Ivanovna? I did though, and how she took it, ha, ha! Oh, no! I am not
acting from any high, exalted motives. But though I may have behaved
like a cad to you, I have not done HER any harm. I don't apologize for
my words about 'leavings' and all that. I am atoning for that, you
see, by telling you the place and time of the meeting. Goodbye! You
had better take your measures, if you are worthy the name of a man! The
meeting is fixed for this evening--that's certain."

Hippolyte walked towards the door, but the prince called him back and he
stopped.

"Then you think Aglaya Ivanovna herself intends to go to Nastasia
Philipovna's tonight?" he asked, and bright hectic spots came out on his
cheeks and forehead.

"I don't know absolutely for certain; but in all probability it is so,"
replied Hippolyte, looking round. "Nastasia would hardly go to her; and
they can't meet at Gania's, with a man nearly dead in the house."

"It's impossible, for that very reason," said the prince. "How would she
get out if she wished to? You don't know the habits of that house--she
COULD not get away alone to Nastasia Philipovna's! It's all nonsense!"

"Look here, my dear prince, no one jumps out of the window if they can
help it; but when there's a fire, the dandiest gentleman or the finest
lady in the world will skip out! When the moment comes, and
there's nothing else to be done--our young lady will go to Nastasia
Philipovna's! Don't they let the young ladies out of the house alone,
then?"

"I didn't mean that exactly."

"If you didn't mean that, then she has only to go down the steps and
walk off, and she need never come back unless she chooses: Ships are
burned behind one sometimes, and one doesn't care to return whence one
came. Life need not consist only of lunches, and dinners, and Prince
S's. It strikes me you take Aglaya Ivanovna for some conventional
boarding-school girl. I said so to her, and she quite agreed with me.
Wait till seven or eight o'clock. In your place I would send someone
there to keep watch, so as to seize the exact moment when she steps out
of the house. Send Colia. He'll play the spy with pleasure--for you at
least. Ha, ha, ha!"

Hippolyte went out.

There was no reason for the prince to set anyone to watch, even if he
had been capable of such a thing. Aglaya's command that he should stay
at home all day seemed almost explained now. Perhaps she meant to call
for him, herself, or it might be, of course, that she was anxious to
make sure of his not coming there, and therefore bade him remain at
home. His head whirled; the whole room seemed to be turning round. He
lay down on the sofa, and closed his eyes.

One way or the other the question was to be decided at last--finally.

Oh, no, he did not think of Aglaya as a boarding-school miss, or a young
lady of the conventional type! He had long since feared that she might
take some such step as this. But why did she wish to see Nastasia?

He shivered all over as he lay; he was in high fever again.

No! he did not account her a child. Certain of her looks, certain of her
words, of late, had filled him with apprehension. At times it had struck
him that she was putting too great a restraint upon herself, and he
remembered that he had been alarmed to observe this. He had tried, all
these days, to drive away the heavy thoughts that oppressed him;
but what was the hidden mystery of that soul? The question had long
tormented him, although he implicitly trusted that soul. And now it was
all to be cleared up. It was a dreadful thought. And "that woman" again!
Why did he always feel as though "that woman" were fated to appear at
each critical moment of his life, and tear the thread of his destiny
like a bit of rotten string? That he always HAD felt this he was ready
to swear, although he was half delirious at the moment. If he had tried
to forget her, all this time, it was simply because he was afraid of
her. Did he love the woman or hate her? This question he did not once
ask himself today; his heart was quite pure. He knew whom he loved. He
was not so much afraid of this meeting, nor of its strangeness, nor of
any reasons there might be for it, unknown to himself; he was afraid
of the woman herself, Nastasia Philipovna. He remembered, some days
afterwards, how during all those fevered hours he had seen but HER eyes,
HER look, had heard HER voice, strange words of hers; he remembered
that this was so, although he could not recollect the details of his
thoughts.

He could remember that Vera brought him some dinner, and that he took
it; but whether he slept after dinner, or no, he could not recollect.

He only knew that he began to distinguish things clearly from the moment
when Aglaya suddenly appeared, and he jumped up from the sofa and went
to meet her. It was just a quarter past seven then.

Aglaya was quite alone, and dressed, apparently hastily, in a light
mantle. Her face was pale, as it had been in the morning, and her
eyes were ablaze with bright but subdued fire. He had never seen that
expression in her eyes before.

She gazed attentively at him.

"You are quite ready, I observe," she said, with absolute composure,
"dressed, and your hat in your hand. I see somebody has thought fit to
warn you, and I know who. Hippolyte?"

"Yes, he told me," said the prince, feeling only half alive.

"Come then. You know, I suppose, that you must escort me there? You are
well enough to go out, aren't you?"

"I am well enough; but is it really possible?--"

He broke off abruptly, and could not add another word. This was his one
attempt to stop the mad child, and, after he had made it, he followed
her as though he had no will of his own. Confused as his thoughts were,
he was, nevertheless, capable of realizing the fact that if he did
not go with her, she would go alone, and so he must go with her at all
hazards. He guessed the strength of her determination; it was beyond him
to check it.

They walked silently, and said scarcely a word all the way. He only
noticed that she seemed to know the road very well; and once, when he
thought it better to go by a certain lane, and remarked to her that it
would be quieter and less public, she only said, "it's all the same,"
and went on.

When they were almost arrived at Daria Alexeyevna's house (it was a
large wooden structure of ancient date), a gorgeously-dressed lady and
a young girl came out of it. Both these ladies took their seats in a
carriage, which was waiting at the door, talking and laughing loudly
the while, and drove away without appearing to notice the approaching
couple.

No sooner had the carriage driven off than the door opened once more;
and Rogojin, who had apparently been awaiting them, let them in and
closed it after them.

"There is not another soul in the house now excepting our four selves,"
he said aloud, looking at the prince in a strange way.

Nastasia Philipovna was waiting for them in the first room they went
into. She was dressed very simply, in black.

She rose at their entrance, but did not smile or give her hand, even to
the prince. Her anxious eyes were fixed upon Aglaya. Both sat down, at
a little distance from one another--Aglaya on the sofa, in the corner
of the room, Nastasia by the window. The prince and Rogojin remained
standing, and were not invited to sit.

Muishkin glanced at Rogojin in perplexity, but the latter only smiled
disagreeably, and said nothing. The silence continued for some few
moments.

An ominous expression passed over Nastasia Philipovna's face, of a
sudden. It became obstinate-looking, hard, and full of hatred; but she
did not take her eyes off her visitors for a moment.

Aglaya was clearly confused, but not frightened. On entering she had
merely glanced momentarily at her rival, and then had sat still, with
her eyes on the ground, apparently in thought. Once or twice she
glanced casually round the room. A shade of disgust was visible in her
expression; she looked as though she were afraid of contamination in
this place.

She mechanically arranged her dress, and fidgeted uncomfortably,
eventually changing her seat to the other end of the sofa. Probably
she was unconscious of her own movements; but this very unconsciousness
added to the offensiveness of their suggested meaning.

At length she looked straight into Nastasia's eyes, and instantly read
all there was to read in her rival's expression. Woman understood woman!
Aglaya shuddered.

"You know of course why I requested this meeting?" she said at last,
quietly, and pausing twice in the delivery of this very short sentence.

"No--I know nothing about it," said Nastasia, drily and abruptly.

Aglaya blushed. Perhaps it struck her as very strange and impossible
that she should really be sitting here and waiting for "that woman's"
reply to her question.

At the first sound of Nastasia's voice a shudder ran through her frame.
Of course "that woman" observed and took in all this.

"You know quite well, but you are pretending to be ignorant," said
Aglaya, very low, with her eyes on the ground.

"Why should I?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, smiling slightly.

"You want to take advantage of my position, now that I am in your
house," continued Aglaya, awkwardly.

"For that position YOU are to blame and not I," said Nastasia, flaring
up suddenly. "_I_ did not invite YOU, but you me; and to this moment I
am quite ignorant as to why I am thus honoured."

Aglaya raised her head haughtily.

"Restrain your tongue!" she said. "I did not come here to fight you with
your own weapons.

"Oh! then you did come 'to fight,' I may conclude? Dear me!--and I
thought you were cleverer--"

They looked at one another with undisguised malice. One of these women
had written to the other, so lately, such letters as we have seen; and
it all was dispersed at their first meeting. Yet it appeared that
not one of the four persons in the room considered this in any degree
strange.

The prince who, up to yesterday, would not have believed that he could
even dream of such an impossible scene as this, stood and listened and
looked on, and felt as though he had long foreseen it all. The most
fantastic dream seemed suddenly to have been metamorphosed into the most
vivid reality.

One of these women so despised the other, and so longed to express her
contempt for her (perhaps she had only come for that very purpose, as
Rogojin said next day), that howsoever fantastical was the other woman,
howsoever afflicted her spirit and disturbed her understanding, no
preconceived idea of hers could possibly stand up against that deadly
feminine contempt of her rival. The prince felt sure that Nastasia
would say nothing about the letters herself; but he could judge by her
flashing eyes and the expression of her face what the thought of those
letters must be costing her at this moment. He would have given half his
life to prevent Aglaya from speaking of them. But Aglaya suddenly braced
herself up, and seemed to master herself fully, all in an instant.

"You have not quite understood," she said. "I did not come to quarrel
with you, though I do not like you. I came to speak to you as... as one
human being to another. I came with my mind made up as to what I had
to say to you, and I shall not change my intention, although you may
misunderstand me. So much the worse for you, not for myself! I wished to
reply to all you have written to me and to reply personally, because I
think that is the more convenient way. Listen to my reply to all your
letters. I began to be sorry for Prince Lef Nicolaievitch on the very
day I made his acquaintance, and when I heard--afterwards--of all that
took place at your house in the evening, I was sorry for him because he
was such a simple-minded man, and because he, in the simplicity of his
soul, believed that he could be happy with a woman of your character.
What I feared actually took place; you could not love him, you tortured
him, and threw him over. You could not love him because you are too
proud--no, not proud, that is an error; because you are too vain--no,
not quite that either; too self-loving; you are self-loving to madness.
Your letters to me are a proof of it. You could not love so simple a
soul as his, and perhaps in your heart you despised him and laughed at
him. All you could love was your shame and the perpetual thought that
you were disgraced and insulted. If you were less shameful, or had no
cause at all for shame, you would be still more unhappy than you are
now."

Aglaya brought out these thronging words with great satisfaction. They
came from her lips hurriedly and impetuously, and had been prepared and
thought out long ago, even before she had ever dreamed of the present
meeting. She watched with eagerness the effect of her speech as shown in
Nastasia's face, which was distorted with agitation.

"You remember," she continued, "he wrote me a letter at that time;
he says you know all about that letter and that you even read it. I
understand all by means of this letter, and understand it correctly. He
has since confirmed it all to me--what I now say to you, word for word.
After receiving his letter I waited; I guessed that you would soon come
back here, because you could never do without Petersburg; you are still
too young and lovely for the provinces. However, this is not my own
idea," she added, blushing dreadfully; and from this moment the colour
never left her cheeks to the end of her speech. "When I next saw the
prince I began to feel terribly pained and hurt on his account. Do not
laugh; if you laugh you are unworthy of understanding what I say."

"Surely you see that I am not laughing," said Nastasia, sadly and
sternly.

"However, it's all the same to me; laugh or not, just as you please.
When I asked him about you, he told me that he had long since ceased to
love you, that the very recollection of you was a torture to him, but
that he was sorry for you; and that when he thought of you his heart was
pierced. I ought to tell you that I never in my life met a man anything
like him for noble simplicity of mind and for boundless trustfulness.
I guessed that anyone who liked could deceive him, and that he would
immediately forgive anyone who did deceive him; and it was for this that
I grew to love him--"

Aglaya paused for a moment, as though suddenly brought up in
astonishment that she could have said these words, but at the same time
a great pride shone in her eyes, like a defiant assertion that it would
not matter to her if "this woman" laughed in her face for the admission
just made.

"I have told you all now, and of course you understand what I wish of
you."

"Perhaps I do; but tell me yourself," said Nastasia Philipovna, quietly.

Aglaya flushed up angrily.

"I wished to find out from you," she said, firmly, "by what right you
dare to meddle with his feelings for me? By what right you dared send me
those letters? By what right do you continually remind both me and him
that you love him, after you yourself threw him over and ran away from
him in so insulting and shameful a way?"

"I never told either him or you that I loved him!" replied Nastasia
Philipovna, with an effort. "And--and I did run away from him--you are
right there," she added, scarcely audibly.

"Never told either him or me?" cried Aglaya. "How about your letters?
Who asked you to try to persuade me to marry him? Was not that a
declaration from you? Why do you force yourself upon us in this way? I
confess I thought at first that you were anxious to arouse an aversion
for him in my heart by your meddling, in order that I might give him up;
and it was only afterwards that I guessed the truth. You imagined that
you were doing an heroic action! How could you spare any love for him,
when you love your own vanity to such an extent? Why could you not
simply go away from here, instead of writing me those absurd letters?
Why do you not NOW marry that generous man who loves you, and has done
you the honour of offering you his hand? It is plain enough why; if you
marry Rogojin you lose your grievance; you will have nothing more to
complain of. You will be receiving too much honour. Evgenie Pavlovitch
was saying the other day that you had read too many poems and are too
well educated for--your position; and that you live in idleness. Add to
this your vanity, and, there you have reason enough--"

"And do you not live in idleness?"

Things had come to this unexpected point too quickly. Unexpected because
Nastasia Philipovna, on her way to Pavlofsk, had thought and considered
a good deal, and had expected something different, though perhaps not
altogether good, from this interview; but Aglaya had been carried away
by her own outburst, just as a rolling stone gathers impetus as it
careers downhill, and could not restrain herself in the satisfaction of
revenge.

It was strange, Nastasia Philipovna felt, to see Aglaya like this. She
gazed at her, and could hardly believe her eyes and ears for a moment or
two.

Whether she were a woman who had read too many poems, as Evgenie
Pavlovitch supposed, or whether she were mad, as the prince had
assured Aglaya, at all events, this was a woman who, in spite of her
occasionally cynical and audacious manner, was far more refined and
trustful and sensitive than appeared. There was a certain amount of
romantic dreaminess and caprice in her, but with the fantastic was
mingled much that was strong and deep.

The prince realized this, and great suffering expressed itself in his
face.

Aglaya observed it, and trembled with anger.

"How dare you speak so to me?" she said, with a haughtiness which was
quite indescribable, replying to Nastasia's last remark.

"You must have misunderstood what I said," said Nastasia, in some
surprise.

"If you wished to preserve your good name, why did you not give up
your--your 'guardian,' Totski, without all that theatrical posturing?"
said Aglaya, suddenly a propos of nothing.

"What do you know of my position, that you dare to judge me?" cried
Nastasia, quivering with rage, and growing terribly white.

"I know this much, that you did not go out to honest work, but went away
with a rich man, Rogojin, in order to pose as a fallen angel. I don't
wonder that Totski was nearly driven to suicide by such a fallen angel."

"Silence!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "You are about as fit to
understand me as the housemaid here, who bore witness against her lover
in court the other day. She would understand me better than you do."

"Probably an honest girl living by her own toil. Why do you speak of a
housemaid so contemptuously?"

"I do not despise toil; I despise you when you speak of toil."

"If you had cared to be an honest woman, you would have gone out as a
laundress."

Both had risen, and were gazing at one another with pallid faces.

"Aglaya, don't! This is unfair," cried the prince, deeply distressed.

Rogojin was not smiling now; he sat and listened with folded arms, and
lips tight compressed.

"There, look at her," cried Nastasia, trembling with passion. "Look at
this young lady! And I imagined her an angel! Did you come to me without
your governess, Aglaya Ivanovna? Oh, fie, now shall I just tell you why
you came here today? Shall I tell you without any embellishments? You
came because you were afraid of me!"

"Afraid of YOU?" asked Aglaya, beside herself with naive amazement that
the other should dare talk to her like this.

"Yes, me, of course! Of course you were afraid of me, or you would not
have decided to come. You cannot despise one you fear. And to think that
I have actually esteemed you up to this very moment! Do you know why
you are afraid of me, and what is your object now? You wished to satisfy
yourself with your own eyes as to which he loves best, myself or you,
because you are fearfully jealous."

"He has told me already that he hates you," murmured Aglaya, scarcely
audibly.

"Perhaps, perhaps! I am not worthy of him, I know. But I think you are
lying, all the same. He cannot hate me, and he cannot have said so. I am
ready to forgive you, in consideration of your position; but I confess
I thought better of you. I thought you were wiser, and more beautiful,
too; I did, indeed! Well, take your treasure! See, he is gazing at you,
he can't recollect himself. Take him, but on one condition; go away at
once, this instant!"

She fell back into a chair, and burst into tears. But suddenly some new
expression blazed in her eyes. She stared fixedly at Aglaya, and rose
from her seat.

"Or would you like me to bid him, BID HIM, do you hear, COMMAND HIM,
now, at once, to throw you up, and remain mine for ever? Shall I? He
will stay, and he will marry me too, and you shall trot home all alone.
Shall I?--shall I say the word?" she screamed like a madwoman, scarcely
believing herself that she could really pronounce such wild words.

Aglaya had made for the door in terror, but she stopped at the
threshold, and listened. "Shall I turn Rogojin off? Ha! ha! you thought
I would marry him for your benefit, did you? Why, I'll call out NOW, if
you like, in your presence, 'Rogojin, get out!' and say to the prince,
'Do you remember what you promised me?' Heavens! what a fool I have been
to humiliate myself before them! Why, prince, you yourself gave me your
word that you would marry me whatever happened, and would never abandon
me. You said you loved me and would forgive me all, and--and resp--yes,
you even said that! I only ran away from you in order to set you free,
and now I don't care to let you go again. Why does she treat me so--so
shamefully? I am not a loose woman--ask Rogojin there! He'll tell you.
Will you go again now that she has insulted me, before your eyes, too;
turn away from me and lead her away, arm-in-arm? May you be accursed
too, for you were the only one I trusted among them all! Go away,
Rogojin, I don't want you," she continued, blind with fury, and forcing
the words out with dry lips and distorted features, evidently not
believing a single word of her own tirade, but, at the same time, doing
her utmost to prolong the moment of self-deception.

The outburst was so terribly violent that the prince thought it would
have killed her.

"There he is!" she shrieked again, pointing to the prince and addressing
Aglaya. "There he is! and if he does not approach me at once and take ME
and throw you over, then have him for your own--I give him up to you! I
don't want him!"

Both she and Aglaya stood and waited as though in expectation, and both
looked at the prince like madwomen.

But he, perhaps, did not understand the full force of this challenge; in
fact, it is certain he did not. All he could see was the poor despairing
face which, as he had said to Aglaya, "had pierced his heart for ever."

He could bear it no longer, and with a look of entreaty, mingled with
reproach, he addressed Aglaya, pointing to Nastasia the while:

"How can you?" he murmured; "she is so unhappy."

But he had no time to say another word before. Aglaya's terrible look
bereft him of speech. In that look was embodied so dreadful a suffering
and so deadly a hatred, that he gave a cry and flew to her; but it was
too late.

She could not hold out long enough even to witness his movement in her
direction. She had hidden her face in her hands, cried once "Oh, my
God!" and rushed out of the room. Rogojin followed her to undo the bolts
of the door and let her out into the street.

The prince made a rush after her, but he, was caught and held back. The
distorted, livid face of Nastasia gazed at him reproachfully, and her
blue lips whispered:

"What? Would you go to her--to her?"

She fell senseless into his arms.

He raised her, carried her into the room, placed her in an arm-chair,
and stood over her, stupefied. On the table stood a tumbler of water.
Rogojin, who now returned, took this and sprinkled a little in her face.
She opened her eyes, but for a moment she understood nothing.

Suddenly she looked around, shuddered, gave a loud cry, and threw
herself in the prince's arms.

"Mine, mine!" she cried. "Has the proud young lady gone? Ha, ha, ha!"
she laughed hysterically. "And I had given him up to her! Why--why did
I? Mad--mad! Get away, Rogojin! Ha, ha, ha!"

Rogojin stared intently at them; then he took his hat, and without a
word, left the room.

A few moments later, the prince was seated by Nastasia on the sofa,
gazing into her eyes and stroking her face and hair, as he would a
little child's. He laughed when she laughed, and was ready to cry when
she cried. He did not speak, but listened to her excited, disconnected
chatter, hardly understanding a word of it the while. No sooner did
he detect the slightest appearance of complaining, or weeping, or
reproaching, than he would smile at her kindly, and begin stroking her
hair and her cheeks, soothing and consoling her once more, as if she
were a child.

IX.

A FORTNIGHT had passed since the events recorded in the last chapter,
and the position of the actors in our story had become so changed that
it is almost impossible for us to continue the tale without some few
explanations. Yet we feel that we ought to limit ourselves to the simple
record of facts, without much attempt at explanation, for a very patent
reason: because we ourselves have the greatest possible difficulty in
accounting for the facts to be recorded. Such a statement on our part
may appear strange to the reader. How is anyone to tell a story which he
cannot understand himself? In order to keep clear of a false position,
we had perhaps better give an example of what we mean; and probably the
intelligent reader will soon understand the difficulty. More especially
are we inclined to take this course since the example will constitute a
distinct march forward of our story, and will not hinder the progress of
the events remaining to be recorded.

During the next fortnight--that is, through the early part of July--the
history of our hero was circulated in the form of strange, diverting,
most unlikely-sounding stories, which passed from mouth to mouth,
through the streets and villas adjoining those inhabited by Lebedeff,
Ptitsin, Nastasia Philipovna and the Epanchins; in fact, pretty
well through the whole town and its environs. All society--both the
inhabitants of the place and those who came down of an evening for the
music--had got hold of one and the same story, in a thousand varieties
of detail--as to how a certain young prince had raised a terrible
scandal in a most respectable household, had thrown over a daughter of
the family, to whom he was engaged, and had been captured by a woman of
shady reputation whom he was determined to marry at once--breaking off
all old ties for the satisfaction of his insane idea; and, in spite of
the public indignation roused by his action, the marriage was to take
place in Pavlofsk openly and publicly, and the prince had announced his
intention of going through with it with head erect and looking the whole
world in the face. The story was so artfully adorned with scandalous
details, and persons of so great eminence and importance were
apparently mixed up in it, while, at the same time, the evidence was so
circumstantial, that it was no wonder the matter gave food for plenty of
curiosity and gossip.

According to the reports of the most talented gossip-mongers--those who,
in every class of society, are always in haste to explain every event
to their neighbours--the young gentleman concerned was of good family--a
prince--fairly rich--weak of intellect, but a democrat and a dabbler
in the Nihilism of the period, as exposed by Mr. Turgenieff. He could
hardly talk Russian, but had fallen in love with one of the Miss
Epanchins, and his suit met with so much encouragement that he had been
received in the house as the recognized bridegroom-to-be of the young
lady. But like the Frenchman of whom the story is told that he studied
for holy orders, took all the oaths, was ordained priest, and next
morning wrote to his bishop informing him that, as he did not believe
in God and considered it wrong to deceive the people and live upon their
pockets, he begged to surrender the orders conferred upon him the day
before, and to inform his lordship that he was sending this letter to
the public press,--like this Frenchman, the prince played a false game.
It was rumoured that he had purposely waited for the solemn occasion of
a large evening party at the house of his future bride, at which he was
introduced to several eminent persons, in order publicly to make known
his ideas and opinions, and thereby insult the "big-wigs," and to throw
over his bride as offensively as possible; and that, resisting the
servants who were told off to turn him out of the house, he had seized
and thrown down a magnificent china vase. As a characteristic addition
to the above, it was currently reported that the young prince really
loved the lady to whom he was engaged, and had thrown her over out of
purely Nihilistic motives, with the intention of giving himself the
satisfaction of marrying a fallen woman in the face of all the world,
thereby publishing his opinion that there is no distinction between
virtuous and disreputable women, but that all women are alike, free; and
a "fallen" woman, indeed, somewhat superior to a virtuous one.

It was declared that he believed in no classes or anything else,
excepting "the woman question."

All this looked likely enough, and was accepted as fact by most of the
inhabitants of the place, especially as it was borne out, more or less,
by daily occurrences.

Of course much was said that could not be determined absolutely. For
instance, it was reported that the poor girl had so loved her future
husband that she had followed him to the house of the other woman, the
day after she had been thrown over; others said that he had insisted on
her coming, himself, in order to shame and insult her by his taunts and
Nihilistic confessions when she reached the house. However all
these things might be, the public interest in the matter grew
