
The other took out his silk handkerchief and wiped his brow. "As near
as that," he muttered.

"Ay, and if he had found you at the house, he might have guessed your
purpose."

John Audley held out a hand trembling with passion. "I would have
killed him!" he cried. "I would have killed him--before he should have
had what is there!"

"Exactly," Basset replied. "And that is why I will have nothing to do
with the matter! It's too risky, sir. If you take my advice you will
give it up."

Audley did not answer. He sat awhile, his shoulders bowed, his eyes
fixed on the hearth, while the other wondered for the hundredth time
if he were sane. At length, "What is he doing here?" the old man asked
in a lifeless tone. The passion had died out of him.

"Shooting, I suppose. But there was some talk in Riddsley of his
coming down to stir up old Mottisfont."

"What about?"

"Against the corn-law repeal, I suppose."

Audley nodded. But after a while, "That's a pretext," he said. "And so
is the shooting. He has followed the girl."

Basset started. "Followed Mary!" he exclaimed.

"What else? I have looked for it from the first. I've pressed you to
come to an understanding with her for that reason. Why the devil can't
you? If you leave it much longer you'll be too late! Too late! And, by
G--d, I'll never forgive you!" with a fresh spirt of passion. "Never!
Never, man!"

"I've not said that I meant to do it."

"You've not said!" Audley replied contemptuously. "Do you think that I
don't know that she's all the world to you? Do you think that I've no
eyes? Do you think that when you sit there watching her from behind
your book by the hour together, I have not my sight? Man, I'm not a
fool! And I tell you that if you're not to lose her you must speak!
You must speak! Stand by another month, wait a little longer, and
Philip Audley will put in his oar, and I'll not give that for your
chances!" He snapped his fingers.

"Why should he put in his oar?" Basset asked sullenly. His face had
turned a dull red.

John Audley shrugged his shoulders. "Do you think that she is without
attractions?"

"But Audley lives in another world."

"The more likely to have attractions for her!"

"But surely he'll look for--for something more," Basset stammered.

"For a rich wife? For an alliance, as the saying is? And sleep ill of
nights? And have bad dreams? No, he is no fool, if you are. He sees
that if he marries the girl he makes himself safe. He makes himself
safe! After me, it lies between them."

"I take it that he does think himself safe."

"Not he!" Audley replied. He was stooping over the ashes, warming his
hands, but at that he jumped up. "Not he! he knows better than you!
And fears! And sleeps ill of nights, d--n him! And dreams! But there,
I must not excite myself. I must not excite myself. Only, if he once
begins, he'll be no laggard in love as you are! He'll not sit puling
and peeping and looking at the back of her head by the hour together!
He'll be up and at her--I know what that big jowl means! And she'll be
in his arms in half the time that you've taken to count her
eyelashes!" He turned in a fresh fit of fury and seized his candle.
"In his arms, I tell you, fool, while you are counting her eyelashes.
Well, lose her, lose her, and I never want to see you again, or her!
Never! I'll curse you both!"

He stumbled to the door and went out, a queer, gibbering, shaking
figure; and Basset had no doubt at such moments that he was mad. But
on this occasion he was afraid--he was very much afraid, as he sat
pondering in his chair, that there was method in his madness!




                             CHAPTER XIII

                             PETER PAUPER


The impression which the events of the evening had made on Mary's mind
was still lively when she awoke next day. It was not less clear,
because like the feminine letter of the 'forties, crossed and
recrossed, it had stamped itself in two layers on her mind, of which
the earlier was the more vivid.

The solitude in which her days had of late been spent had left her
peculiarly open to new ideas, while the quiet and wholesome life of
the Gatehouse had prepared her to answer any call which those ideas
might make upon her. Rescued from penury, lifted above anxiety about
bed and board, no longer exposed to the panic-fears which in Paris had
beset even her courageous nature, Mary had for a while been content
simply to rest. She had taken the sunshine, the beauty, the ease and
indolence of her life as a convalescent accepts idleness, without
scruple or question.

But this could not last. She was young, nature soon rallied in her,
and she had seen things and done things during the last two years
which forbade her to accept such a limited horizon as satisfied most
of the women of that day. Unlike them, she had viewed the world from
more than one standpoint; through the grille of a convent school, from
the grimy windows of a back-street in Paris; again, as it moved
beneath the painted ceilings of a French salon. And now, as it
presented itself in this retired house.

Therefore she could not view things as those saw them whose standpoint
had never shifted. She had suffered, she still had twinges--for who,
with her experience, could be sure that the path would continue easy?
And so to her Mr. Colet's sermon had made a strong appeal.

It left the word which Mr. Colet had taken for his text sounding in
her ears. Borne upward on the eloquence which earnestness had lent to
the young preacher, she looked down on a world in torment, a world
holding up piteous hands, craving, itself in ignorance, the help of
those who held the secret, and whose will might make that secret
sufficient to save. Love! To do to others as she would have others do
to her! With every day, with every hour, with every minute to do
something for others! Always to give, never to take! Above all to give
herself, to do her part in that preference of others to self, which
could alone right these mighty wrongs, could find work for the idle,
food for the hungry, roofs for the homeless, knowledge for the blind,
healing for the sick! Which could save all this world in torment, and
could


                 "Build a Heaven in Hell's despair!"


It was a beautiful vision, and in this her first glimpse of it, Mary's
fancy was not chilled by the hard light of experience. It seemed so
plain that if the workman had his master's profit at heart, and the
master were as anxious for the weal of his men, the interests of the
two would be one. Equally plain it seemed that if they who grew the
food aimed at feeding the greatest number, and they who ate had the
same desire to reward the grower, if every man shrank from taking
advantage of other men, if the learned lived to spread their
knowledge, and the strong to help the weak, if no man wronged his
neighbor, but


                  "Each for another gave his ease,"


then it seemed equally plain that love would indeed be lord of all!

Later, she might discover that it takes two to make a bargain; that
charity does bless him who gives but not always him who takes; even,
that cheap bread might be a dear advantage--that at least it might
have its drawbacks.

But for the moment it was enough for Mary that the vision was
beautiful and, as a theory, true. So that, gazing upward at the faded
dimity of her tester, she longed to play her part in it. That world in
torment, those countless hands stretched upward in appeal, that murmur
of infinite pain, the cry of the hungry, of the widow, of men sitting
by tireless hearths, of children dying in mill and mine--the picture
wrought on her so strongly, that she could not rest. She rose, and
though the hoar frost was white on the grass and the fog of an autumn
morning still curtained the view, she began to dress.

Perhaps the chill of the cold water in which she washed sobered her.
At any rate, with the comb in one hand and her hair in the other, she
drifted down another line of thought. Lord Audley--how strange was the
chance which had again brought them together! How much she owed him,
with what kindness had he seen to her comfort, how masterfully had he
arranged matters for her on the boat. And then she smiled. She
recalled Basset's ill-humor, or his--jealousy. At the thought of what
the word implied, Mary colored.

There could be nothing in the notion, yet she probed her own feelings.
Certainly she liked Lord Audley. If he was not handsome, he had that
air of strength and power which impresses women; and he had ease and
charm, and the look of fashion which has its weight with even the most
sensible of her sex. He had all these and he was a man, and she
admired him and was grateful to him. And yesterday she might have
thought that her feeling for him was love.

But this morning she had gained a higher notion of love. She had
learned from Etruria how near to that pattern of love which Mr. Colet
preached the love of man and woman could rise. She had a new
conception of its strength and its power to expel what was selfish or
petty. She had seen it in its noblest form in Etruria, and she knew
that her feeling for Lord Audley was not in the same world with
Etruria's feeling for the curate. She laughed at the notion.

"Poor Etruria!" she meditated. "Or should it be, happy Etruria? Who
knows? I only know that I am heart-whole!"

And she knotted up her hair and, Diana-like, went out into the pure
biting air of the morning, along the green rides hoary with dew and
fringed with bracken, under the oak trees from which the wood-pigeons
broke in startled flight.

But if the energy of her thoughts carried her out, fatigue soon
brought her to a pause. The evening's excitement, the strain of the
adventure had not left her, young as she was, unscathed. The springs
of enthusiasm waned with her strength, and presently she felt jaded.
She perceived that she would have done better had she rested longer;
and too late the charms of bed appealed to her.

She was at the breakfast table when Basset--he, too, had had a
restless night and many thoughts--came down. He saw that she was pale
and that there were shadows under her eyes, and the man's tenderness
went out to her. He longed, he longed above everything to put himself
right with her; and on the impulse of the moment, "I want you to
know," he said, standing meekly at her elbow, "that I am sorry I lost
my temper last evening."

But she was out of sympathy with him. "It is nothing," she said. "We
were all tired, I think. Etruria is not down yet."

"But I want to ask your----"

"Oh dear, dear!" she cried, interrupting him with a gesture of
impatience. "Don't let us rake it up again. If my uncle has not
suffered, there is no harm done. Please let it rest."

But he could not let it rest. He longed to put his neck under her
foot, and he did not see that she was in the worst possible mood for
his purpose. "Still," he said, "you must let me say----"

"Don't!" she cried. She put her hands to her ears. Then, seeing that
she had wounded him, she dropped them and spoke more kindly. "Don't
let us make much of little, Mr. Basset. It was all natural enough. You
don't like Lord Audley----"

"I don't."

"And you did not understand that we had been terribly frightened, and
had good reason to be grateful to him. I am sure that if you had known
that, you would have behaved differently. There!" with a smile. "And
now that I have made the amende for you, let us have breakfast. Here
is your coffee."

He knew that she was holding him off, and all his alarms of the night
were quickened. Again and again had John Audley's warning recurred to
him and as often he had striven to reject it, but always in vain. And
gradually, slowly, it had kindled his resolution, it had fired him to
action. Now, the very modesty which had long kept him silent and
withheld him from enterprise was changed--as so often happens with
diffident man--into rashness. He was as anxious to put his fate to the
test as he had before been unwilling.

Presently, "You will not need to tell your uncle about Lord Audley,"
he said. "I've done it."

"I hope you told him," she answered gravely, "that we were indebted to
Lord Audley for our safety."

"You don't trust me?"

"Don't say things like that!" she cried. "It is foolish. I have no
doubt that in telling my uncle you meant to relieve me. You have
helped me more than once in that way. But----"

"But this is a special occasion?"

She looked at him. "If you wish us to be friends----"

"I don't," he answered roughly. "I don't want to be friends with you."

Then, ambiguous as his words were, she saw where she stood, and she
mustered her presence of mind. She rose from her seat. "And I," she
said, "am not going to quarrel with you, Mr. Basset. I am going now to
learn how Etruria is. And then I shall see my uncle."

She escaped before he could answer.

Once or twice it had crossed her mind that he looked at her with
intention; and once reading that look in his eyes she had felt her
color rise, and her heart beat more quickly. But the absence on her
side of any feeling, except that which a sister might feel for a kind
brother, this and the reserve of his manner had nipped the fancy as
soon as it budded. And if she had given it a second thought, it had
been only to smile at her vanity.

Now she had no doubt of the fact, no doubt that it was jealousy that
moved him, and her uppermost, almost her only feeling was vexation.
Because they had lived in the same house for five months, because he
had been useful and she had been grateful, because they were man and
woman, how foolish it was! How absurd! How annoying! She foresaw from
it many, many, inconveniences; a breach in their pleasant intercourse,
displeasure on her uncle's part, trouble in the house that had been so
peaceful--oh, many things. But that which vexed her most was the fear
that she had, all unwittingly, encouraged him.

She believed that she had not. But while she talked to Etruria, and
later, as she went down the stairs to interview her uncle, she had
this weight on her mind. She strove to recall words and looks, and
upon the whole she was sure that she could acquit herself, sure that
of this evil no part lay at her door. But it was very, very vexatious!

On the threshold of the library she wrested her thoughts back to the
present, and paused a moment, considering what she should say to her
uncle.

She need not have troubled herself, for he was not there. At the first
glance she took the room to be empty; a second showed her Basset. She
turned to retire, but too late; he stepped between her and the door
and closed it. He was a little paler than usual, and his air of
purpose was not to be mistaken.

She stiffened. "I came to see my uncle," she said.

"I am the bearer of a message from him," he answered. "He asked me to
say that he considers the matter at an end. He does not wish it to be
mentioned again. Of course he does not blame you."

"But, Mr. Basset----"

But he would not let her speak. "That was his message," he continued,
"and I am glad to be the messenger because it gives me a chance of
speaking to you. Will you sit down?"

"But we have only just parted," she remonstrated, struggling against
her fate. "I don't understand what you want----"

"To say? No, I am going to explain it--if you will sit down."

She sat down then with the feeling that she was trapped. And since it
was clear that she must go through with it, she was glad that his
insistence hardened her heart and dried up the springs of pity.

He went to the fire, stooped and moved the wood. "You won't come
nearer?" he said.

"No," she replied. How foolish to trap her like this if he thought to
get anything from her!

He turned to her and his face was changed. Under his wistful look she
discovered that it was not so easy to be hard, not so easy to maintain
her firmness. "You would rather escape?" he said, reading her mind. "I
know. But I can't let you escape. You are thinking that I have trapped
you? And you are fearing that I am going to make you unhappy for--for
half an hour perhaps? I know. And I am fearing that you are going to
make me unhappy for--always."

No, she could not retain her hardness. She knew that she was going to
feel pity after all. But she would not speak.

"I have only hope," he went on. "There is only one thing I am clinging
to. I have read that when a man loves a woman very truly, very deeply,
as I love you, Mary"--she started violently, and blushed to the roots
of her hair, so sudden was the avowal--"as I love you," he repeated
sorrowfully, "I have read that she either hates him or loves him. His
love is a fire that either warms her or scorches her, draws her or
repels her. I thought of that last night, as I thought of many things,
and I was sure, I was confident that you did not hate me."

"Oh no," she answered, unsteadily. "Indeed, indeed, I don't! I am very
grateful to you. But the other--I don't think it is true."

"No?" he said, keeping his eyes on her face. "And then, you don't
doubt that I love you?"

"No." The flush had faded from her face and left her pale. "I don't
doubt that--now."

"It is so true that--you know that you have sometimes called me Peter?
Well, I would have given much, very much to call you Mary. But I did
not dare. I could not. For I knew that if I did, only once, my voice
would betray me, and that I should alarm you before the time! I knew
that that one word--that word alone--would set my heart upon my sleeve
for all to see. And I did not want to alarm you. I did not want to
hurry you. I thought then that I had time, time to make myself known
to you, time to prove my devotion, time to win you, Mary. I thought
that I could wait. Now, since last night, I am afraid to wait. I
doubt, nay I am sure, that I have no time, that I dare not wait."

She did not answer, but the color mounted again to her face.

He turned and knocked the fire together with his foot. Then he took a
step towards her. "Tell me," he said, "have I any chance? Any chance
at all, Mary?"

She shook her head; but seeing then that he kept his eyes fixed on her
and would not take that for an answer, "None," she said as kindly as
she could. "I must tell you the truth. It is useless to try to break
it. I have never once, not once thought of you but as a friend,
Peter."

"But now," he said, "cannot you regard me differently--now! Now that
you know? Cannot you begin to think of me as--a lover?"

"No," Mary said frankly and pitifully. "I should not be honest if I
said that I could. If I held out hopes. You have been always good to
me, kind to me, a dear friend, a brother when I had need of one. And I
am grateful, Mr. Basset, honestly, really grateful to you. And fond of
you--in that way. But I could not think of you in the way you desire.
I know it for certain. I know that there is no chance."

He stood for a moment without speaking, and seeing how stricken he
looked, how sad his face, her eyes filled with tears. Then, "Is there
any one else?" he asked slowly, his eyes on her face.

She did not answer. She rose to her feet.

"Is there any one else?" he repeated, a new note in his voice. He
moved forward a step.

"You have no right to ask that," she said.

"I have every right," he replied. "What?" he continued, moving still
nearer to her, his whole bearing changed in a moment by the sting of
jealousy. "I am condemned, I am rejected, and I am not to ask why?"

"No," she said.

"But I do ask!" he retorted with a passion which surprised and alarmed
her; he was no longer the despondent lover of five minutes before, but
a man demanding his rights. "Have you no heart? Have you no feeling
for me? Do you not consider what this is to me?"

"I consider," Mary replied with a warmth almost equal to his own,
"that if I answered your question I should humiliate myself. No one,
no one has a right, sir, to ask that question. And least of all you!"

"And I am to be cast aside, I am to be discarded without a reason?"

That word "discarded" seemed so unjust, and so uncalled for, seeing
that she had given him no encouragement, that it stung her to anger.
"Without a reason?" she retorted. "I have given you a reason--I do not
return your love. That is the only reason that you have a right to
know. But if you press me, I will tell you why what you propose is
impossible. Because, if I ever love a man I hope, Mr. Basset, that it
will be one who has some work in the world, something to do that shall
be worth the doing, a man with ambitions above mere trifling, mere
groping in the dust of the past for facts that, when known, make no
man happier, and no man better, and scarce a man wiser! Do you ever
think," she continued, carried away by the remembrance of Mr. Colet's
zeal, "of the sorrow and pain that are in the world? Of the vast
riddles that are to be solved? Of the work that awaits the wisest and
the strongest, and at which all in their degree can help? My uncle is
an old man, it is well he should play with the past. I am a girl, it
may serve for me. But what do you here?" She pointed to his table,
laden with open folios and calf-bound volumes. "You spend a week in
proving a Bohun marriage that is nothing to any one. Another, in
raking up a blot that is better forgotten! A third in tracing to its
source some ancient tag! You move a thousand books--to make one
knight! Is that a man's work?"

"At least," he said huskily, "I do no harm."

"No harm?" Mary replied, swept away by her feelings. "Is that enough?
Because in this quiet corner, which is home to my uncle and a refuge
to me, no call reaches you, is it enough that you do no harm? Is there
no good to be done? Think, Mr. Basset! I am ignorant, a woman. But I
know that to-day there are great questions calling for an answer,
wrongs clamoring to be righted, a people in travail that pleads for
ease! I know that there is work in England for men, for all! Work,
that if there be any virtue left in ancient blood should summon you as
with a trumpet call!"

He did not answer. Twice, early in her attack he had moved as if he
would defend himself. Then he had let his chin fall and he had
listened with his eyes on the table. And--but she had not seen it--he
had more than once shivered under her words as under a lash. For he
loved her and she scourged him. He loved her, he desired her, he had
put her on a pedestal, and all the time she had been viewing him with
the clear merciless eyes of youth, trying him by the standard of her
dreams, probing his small pretensions, finding him a potterer in a
library--he who in his vanity had raised his eyes to her and sought to
be her hero!

It was a cruel lesson, cruelly given; and it wounded him to the heart.
So that she, seeing too late that he made no reply, seeing the
grayness of his face, and that he did not raise his eyes, had a
too-late perception of what she had done, of how cruel she had been,
of how much more she had said than she had meant to say. She stood
conscience-stricken, remorseful, ashamed.

And then, "Oh, I am sorry!" she cried. "I am sorry! I should not have
said that! You meant to honor me and I have hurt you."

He looked up then, but neither the shadow nor the grayness left his
face. "Perhaps it was best," he said dully. "I am sure that you meant
well."

"I did," she cried. "I did! But I was wrong. Utterly wrong!"

"No," he said, "you were not wrong. The truth was best."

"But perhaps it was not the truth," she replied, anxious at once,
miserably anxious to undo what she had done, to unsay what she had
said, to tell him that she was conceited, foolish, a mere girl! "I am
no judge--after all what do I know of these things? What have I done
that I should say anything?"

"I am afraid that what is said is said," he replied. "I have always
known that I was no knight-errant. I have never been bold until
to-day--and it has not answered," with a sickly smile. "But we
understand one another now--and I relieve you."

He passed her on his way to the door, and she thought that he was
going to hold it open for her to go out. But when he reached the door
he fumbled for the handle, found it as a blind man might find it, and
went out himself, without turning his head.




                             CHAPTER XIV

                          THE MANCHESTER MEN


Basset knew every path that crossed the Chase, and had traversed them
at all seasons, and in all weathers. But when, some hours later, he
halted on a scarred and blackened waste that stretched to the horizon
on every side, he would have been hard put to it to say how he came to
be there. He wore his hat, he carried his stick, but he could not
remember how he had become possessed of either.

For a time the shock of disappointment, the numbing sense of loss had
dulled his mind. He had walked as in a dream, repeating over and over
again that that was what she thought of him--and he had loved her. It
was possible that in the interval he had sworn at fate, or shrieked
against the curlews, or cursed the inhuman sky that mocked him with
its sameness. But he did not think that he had. He felt the life in
him too low for such outbursts. He told himself that he was a poor
creature, a broken thing, a failure. He loved her, and--and that was
what she thought of him.

He sat on the stump of an ancient thorn-tree that had been a landmark
on the burnt heath longer than the oldest man could remember, and he
began to put together what she had said. He was trifling away his
life, picking stray finds from the dust-heap of the past, making no
man wiser and no man better, doing nothing for any one! Was she right?
The Bohun pedigree, at which he had worked so long? He had been proud
of his knowledge of Norman descents, proud of the research which had
won that knowledge, proud of his taste for following up recondite
facts. Were the knowledge, the research, the taste, all things for
which he ought to blush? Certainly, tried by the test, _cui bono?_
they came off but poorly. And perhaps, to sit down at his age, content
with such employments, might seem unworthy and beneath him, if there
were other calls upon him. But were there other calls?

Time had been when his family had played a great part, not in
Staffordshire only but in England; and then doubtless public service
had been a tradition with them. But the tradition had waned with their
fortunes. In these days he was only a small squire, a little more
regarded than the new men about him; but with no ability to push his
way in a crowd, no mastery among his fellow-men, one whom character
and position alike cast for a silent part.

Of course she knew none of these things, but with the enthusiasm of
youth she looked to find in every man the qualities of the leading
role. He who seldom raised his voice at Quarter Sessions or on the
Grand Jury--to which his birth rather than his possessions called
him--she would have had him figure among the great, lead causes,
champion the oppressed! It was pitiful, if it had not been absurd!

He walked on by and by, dwelling on the pity of it, a very unhappy
man. He thought of the evenings in the library when she had looked
over his shoulder, and one lamp had lighted them; of the mornings when
the sun had gilded her hair as she bent over the task she was even
then criticizing; of afternoons when the spirit of the chase had been
theirs, and the sunshine and the flowers had had no charm strong
enough to draw them from the pursuit of--alas! something that could
make no man better or wiser. He had lost her; and if aught mattered
apart from that, she had for ever poisoned the springs of content,
muddied the wells of his ordered life.

Beyond doubt she loved the other, for had she not, she would have
viewed things differently. Beyond doubt in her love for the other lay
the bias that weighted her strictures. And yet, making all allowance
for that, there was so much of truth in what she had said, so much
that hit the mark, that he could never be the same again, never give
himself with pleasure to his former pursuits, never find the old life
a thing to satisfy!

And still, like the tolling of a death bell above the city's life, two
thoughts beat on his mind again and again, and gave him intolerable
pain. That was what she thought of him! And he had lost her! That was
what she thought of him! And he had lost her! Her slender gracious
figure, her smiling eyes, the glint in her hair, her goodness, her
very self--all were for another! All were lost to him!

Presently the day began to draw in, and fagged and hopeless he turned
and began to make his way back. His road lay through Brown Heath, the
mining village, where in all the taverns and low-browed shops they
were beginning to light their candles. He crossed the Triangle, and
made his way along the lane, deep in coal-dust and foul with drains,
that ran upwards to the Chase. A pit, near at hand, had just turned
out its shift, and in the dusk tired men, swinging tins in their
hands, were moving by twos and threes along the track. With his bent
shoulders and weary gait he was lost among them, he walked one with
them; yet here and there an older man espied the difference,
recognized him, and greeted him with rough respect. Presently the
current slackened; something, he could not see what, dammed the
stream. A shrewish voice rose in the darkness before him, and other
voices, angry, clamant, protesting, struck in. A few of the men pushed
by the trouble, others stood, here and there a man added a taunt to
the brawl. In his turn Basset came abreast of the quarrel. He halted.

A farm cart blocked the roadway. Over the tail hung three or four
wailing children; into it a couple of sturdy men were trying to lift
an old woman, seated in a chair. A dingy beadle and a constable, who
formed the escort and looked ill at ease, stood beside the cart, and
round it half a score of slatternly women pushed and shrieked and
gesticulated. On the group and the whole dreary scene nightfall cast a
pallid light.

"What is it?" Basset asked.

"They're shifting Nan Oates to the poorhouse," a man answered. "Her
son died of the fever, and there's none to keep her or the little uns.
She've done till now, but they'll not give her bite nor sup out of the
House--that's the law now't seems. So the House it be!"

"Her'd rather die than go!" cried a girl.

"D--n them and their Bastilles!" exclaimed a younger man. "Are we free
men, or are we not?"

"Free men?" shrieked a woman, who had seized the horse's rein and was
loudest in her outcry. "No, nor Staffordshire men, nor Englishmen, nor
men at all, if you let an old woman that's always lived decent go to
their stone jug this way. Give me Stafford Gaol--'tis miles afore it!"

"Ay, you're at home there, Bet!" a voice in the crowd struck in, and
the laugh that followed lightened matters.

Basset looked with pity at the old woman. Her head sunk upon her
breast, her thin shawl tucked about her shoulders, her gray hair in
wisps on her cheeks, she gazed in tearless grief upon the hovel which
had been home to her. "Who's to support her," he asked, "if she
stays?"

"For the bite and sup there's neighbors," a man answered. "Reverend
Colet he said he might do something. But he's been lammed. And there's
the rent. The boy's ten, and he made four shilling a week in the pit,
but the new law's stopped the young uns working."

"Ay, d--n all new laws!" cried another. "Poor laws and pit laws we're
none but the worse for them!"

The men were preparing to move the cart. The woman who held the rein
clung to it. "Now, Bet, have a care!" said the constable. "Or you'll
go home by Weeping Cross again!"

"Cross? I'll cross you!" the termagant retorted. "Selling up widows'
houses is your bread and meat! May the devil, hoof and horn, with his
scythe on his back, go through you! If there were three men here, ay,
men as you'd call men----"

"Easy, woman, easy!"

"Woman, dang you! You call me woman----"

"Now, let go, Bet! You'll be in trouble else!" some one said.

But she held on, and the crowd were beginning to jostle the men in
charge when Basset stepped forward. "Steady, a moment," he said. "Will
the guardians let the woman stop if the rent is provided?"

"Who be you, master?" the constable asked. "You'd best let us do our
duty."

"Dang it, man," an old fellow interposed, "it's Squire Basset of
Blore. Dunno you know him? Keep a civil tongue in your head, will
you!"

"Ay," chimed in another, pushing forward with a menacing gesture. "You
be careful, Jack! You be Jack in office, but 'twon't always be so!
'Twon't always be so!"

"Mr. Colet knows the old woman?" Basset asked.

"Sure, sir, the curate knows her."

"Well, I'll find the rent," Basset said, addressing the constable, "if
you'll let her be. I'll see the overseer about her in the morning."

"So long as she don't come on the rates, sir?"

"She'll not come on the rates for six months," Basset said. "I'll be
answerable for so much."

The men had little stomach for their task, and with a good excuse they
were willing enough to desist. A woman fetched a stub of a pen and a
drop of ink and Basset wrote a word for their satisfaction. While he
did so, "O'd Staffordshire! O'd Staffordshire!" a man explained in the
background. "Bassets of Blore--they be come from an Abbey and come to
a Grange, as the saying is. You never heard of the Bassets of Blore,
you be neither from Mixen nor Moor!" In old Stafford talk the rich
lands of Cheshire stood for the "mixen" as against the bare heaths of
the home county.

In five minutes the business was done, the woman freed, and Basset was
trudging away through the gathering darkness. But the incident had
done him good. It had lightened his heart. It had changed ever so
little the direction of his thoughts. Out of his own trouble he had
stretched a hand to another; and although he knew that it was not by
stray acts such as this that he could lift himself to Mary's standard,
though the battle over the new Poor Law had taught him, and many
others, that charity may be the greatest of evils, what he had done
seemed to bring him nearer to her. A hardship of the poor, which he
might have seen with blind eyes, or viewed from afar as the inevitable
result of the stay of outdoor relief, had come home to him. As he
plodded across the moor he carried with him a picture of the old woman
with her gray hair falling about her wrinkled face, and her hands
clasped in hopeless resignation. And he felt that his was not the only
trouble in the world.

When he had passed the wall of Beaudelays Park, Basset struck--not far
from the Gatehouse--into the road leading down to the Vale, and a
couple of hours after dark he plodded into Riddsley. He made for the
Audley Arms, a long straggling house on the main street, in one part
of two stories, in another of three, with a big bay window at the end.
Entering the yard by the archway he ordered a gig to go to the
Gatehouse for his portmanteau. Then he turned into the inn, and
scribbled a note to John Audley, stating that he was called away, and
would explain matters when he wrote again. He sent it by the driver.

It was eight o'clock. "I am afraid, Squire," the landlord said, "that
there's no fire upstairs. If you'd not mind our parlor for once,
there's no one there and it's snug and warm."

"I'll do that, Musters," he said. He was cold and famished and he was
not sorry to avoid the company of his own thoughts. In the parlor,
next door to the Snug, he might be alone or listen to the local gossip
as he pleased.

Ten minutes later he sat in front of a good plain meal, and for the
time the pangs of appetite overcame those of disappointment. About
nine the landlord entered on some errand. "I suppose, sir," he said,
lingering to see that his guest had all that he wanted, "you've heard
this about Mr. Mottisfont?"

"No, Musters, what is it? Get a clean glass and tell me about it."

"He's to resign, sir, I hear. And his son is to stand."

"Why?"

"Along o' this about Sir Robert Peel, I understand. They have it that
Sir Robert's going to repeal the corn taxes--some say that he's been
for it all through, and some talk about a potato failure. Mr.
Mottisfont sees that that'll never do for Riddsley, but he don't want
to part from his leader, after following him all these years; so he'll
go out and the young gentleman will take his place."

"Do you think it is true about Peel?"

"They're saying it, and Mr. Stubbs, he believes it. But it'll never go
down in Riddsley, Squire. We're horn and corn men here, two to one of
us. There's just the two small factories on the other side, and most
of the hands haven't votes. But here's Mr. Stubbs himself."

The lawyer had looked into the room in passing. Seeing Basset he
removed his hat. "Pardon, Squire," he said. "I did not know that you
were here."

"Not at all," Basset answered. He knew the lawyer locally, and had
seen him often--at arm's length--in the peerage suit. "Will you take a
glass of wine with me?"

Stubbs said that he would with pleasure, if he might take it
standing--his time was short. The landlord was for withdrawing, but
Stubbs detained him. "No, John, with Mr. Basset's leave I've a bone to
pick with you," he said. "Who are these men who are staying here?"

Musters's face fell. "Lord, Mr. Stubbs," he said, "have you heard of
them?"

"I hear most things," the lawyer answered. "But repealers talking
treason at the Audley Arms is a thing I never thought to hear. They
must go."

The landlord rubbed his head. "I can't turn 'em out," he said. "They'd
have the law of me. His lordship couldn't turn 'em out."

"I don't know about that," Stubbs replied. "He's a good landlord, but
he likes his own way."

"But what can I do?" the stout man protested. "When they came I knew
no more about them than a china babe. When they began to talk, so glib
that no one could answer them, I was more took aback than anybody.
Seems like the world's coming to an end with Manchester men coming
here."

"Perhaps it is," Basset said.

Stubbs met his eye and took his meaning. Later the lawyer maintained
that he had his suspicions from that moment. At the time he only
answered, "Not in our day, Mr. Basset. Peel or Repeal, there's no one
has attacked the land yet but the land has broken them. And so it will
be this time. John, the sooner those two are out of your house the
better."

"But, dang me, sir, what am I to do?"

"Put 'em in the horse trough for what I care!" the lawyer replied.
"Good-evening, Squire. I hope the Riddsley parliament mayn't disturb
you."

The landlord followed him out, after handing something through the
hatch, which opened into the Snug. He left the hatch a little ajar
when he had done so, and the voices of those who gathered there
nightly, as to a club, reached Basset. At first he caught no more than
a word here or there, but as the debate grew warm the speakers raised
their voices.

"All mighty fine," some one said, laying down the law, "but you're
like the rest, you Manchester chaps. You've your eyes on your own rack
and manger!"

"I'm not denying it," came the answer in a Lancashire accent, "I'm not
saying that cheap bread won't suit us. But it isn't for that----"

"No, no, of course not," the former speaker replied with heavy
irony--Basset thought that the voice belonged to Hayward of the
Leasows, a pompous old farmer, dubbed behind his back "The Duke." "You
don't want low wages i' your mills, of course!"

"Cheap bread doesn't make low wages," the other rejoined. "That's
where you mistake, sir. Let me put it to you. You've known wheat
high?"

"It was seventy-seven shillings seven years back," the farmer
pronounced. "And I ha' known it a hundred shillings a quarter for
three years together."

"And I suppose the wages at that time were the highest you've ever
known?"

"Well, no," the farmer admitted, "I'm not saying that."

"And seven years ago when wheat was seventy-seven--it is fifty-six
now--were wages higher then than now?"

"Well," the Duke answered reluctantly, "I don't know as they were,
mister, not to take notice of."

"Think it out for yourself, sir," the other replied. "I don't think
you'll find that wages are highest when wheat is highest, nor lowest
when wheat is lowest."

The farmer, more weighty than ready, snorted. But another speaker took
up the cudgels. "Ay, but one minute," he said. "It's the price of
wheat fixes the lowest wages. If it's two pound of bread will keep a
man fit to work--just keep him so and no more--it's the price of bread
fixes whether the lowest wages is eightpence a day or a shilling a
day."

"Well, but----"

"Well, but by G--d, he's got you there!" the Duke cried, and smacked
his fat thigh in triumph. "We've some sense i' Riddsley yet. Here's
your health and song, Dr. Pepper!" At which there was some laughter.

"Well, sir, I'll not say yes, nor no, to that," the Lancashire man
replied, as soon as he could get a hearing. "But, gentlemen, it's not
low wages we want. I'll tell you the two things we do want, and why we
want cheap bread; first, that your laborers after they have bought
bread may have something over to buy our woollens, and our cottons,
and your pots. And secondly, if we don't take foreign wheat in payment
how are foreigners to pay for our goods?"

But at this half a dozen were up in arms. "How?" cried the Duke, "why
wi' money like honest men at home! But there it is! There's the
devil's hoof! It's foreign corn you're after! And with foreign corn
coming in at forty shillings where'll we be?"

"No wheat will ever be grown at that price," declared the free trader
with solemnity, "here or abroad!"

"So you say!" cried Hayward. "But put it at forty-five. We'll be on
the rates, and our laborers, where'll they be?"

"I don't like such talk in my house!" said Musters.

"I'd certainly like an answer to that," Pepper the surgeon said. "If
the farmers are broke where'll their laborers be but flocking to your
mills to put down wages there!"

"The laborers? Well, they're protected now, that's true."

"Lucky for them!" cried two or three.

"They are protected now," the stranger repeated slowly. "And I'll tell
you what one of them said to me last year. 'I be protected,' he said,
'and I be starving!'"

"Dang his impudence!" muttered old Hayward. "That's the kind of thing
they two Boshams at the Bridge talk. Firebrands they be!"

But the shot had told; no one else spoke.

"That man's wages," the Manchester man continued, "were six shillings
a week--it was in Wiltshire. And you are protected too, sir," he
continued, turning suddenly on the Duke. "Have you made a fortune,
sir, farming?"

"I don't know as I have," the farmer answered sulkily--and in a lower
voice, "Dang his impudence again!"

"Why not? Because you are paying a protected rent. Because you pay
high for feeding-stuff. Because you pay poor-rates so high you'd be
better off paying double wages. There's only one man benefits by the
corn-tax, sir, there's only one who is truly protected, and that is
the landlord!"

But to several in the room this was treason, and they cried out upon
it. "Ay, that's the bottom of it, mister," one roared, "down with the
landlords and up with the cotton lords!" "There's your Reform Bill,"
shouted another, "we've put the beggars on horseback, and none's to
ride but them now!" A third protested that cheap bread was a herring
drawn across the track. "They're for cheap bread for the poor man, but
no votes! Votes would make him as good as them!"

"Anyway," the stranger replied patiently, "it's clear that neither the
farmer nor the laborer grows fat on Protection. Your wages are nine
shillings----"

"Ten and eleven!" cried two or three.

"And your farmers are smothered in rates. If that's all you get by
Protection I'd try another system."

"Anyways, I'll ask you to try it out of my house," Musters said. "I've
a good landlord and I'll not hear him abused!"

"Hear! Hear! Musters! Quite right!"

"I've not said an uncivil word," the Manchester man rejoined. "I shall
leave your house to-morrow, not an hour before. I'll add only one
word, gentlemen. Bread is the staff of life. Isn't it the last thing
you should tax?"

"True," Mr. Pepper replied. "But isn't agriculture the staple
industry? Isn't it the base on which all other industries stand? Isn't
it the mainstay of the best constitution in the world? And wasn't it
the land that steadied England, and kept it clear of Bonaparte and
Wooden Shoes----"

"Ay, wooden ships against wooden shoes for ever!" broke in old
Hayward, in great excitement. "Where were the oaks grown as beat Bony!
No, master, protect the oak and protect the wheat, and England'll
never lack ships nor meat! Your cotton-printers and ironfounders
they're great folks now, great folks, with their brass and their
votes, and so they've a mind to upset the gentry. It's the town
against the country, and new money against the old acres that have fed
us and our fathers before us world without end! But put one of my lads
in your mills, and amid your muck, and in twelve months he'd not pitch
hay, no not three hours of the day!"

Basset could hear the free trader's chair grate on the sanded floor as
he pushed it back. "Well, gentlemen," he said, "I'll not quarrel with
you. I wish you all the protection you deserve--and I think Sir Robert
will give it you! For us, I'm not saying that we are not thinking of
our own interests."

"Devil a doubt of that!" muttered the farmer.

"And some of us may have been cold-shouldered by my lord. But you
may take it from me that there's some of us, too, are as anxious to
better the poor man's lot--ay, as Lord Ashley himself! That's all!
Good-night, gentlemen."

When he was gone, "Gi' me a coal for my pipe, John," said the Duke. "I
never heard the like of that in Riddsley. He's a gallus glib chap
that!"

"I won't say," said Mr. Pepper cautiously, "that there's nothing in
it."

"Plenty in it for the cotton people and the coal people, and the
potters. But not for us!"

"But if Sir Robert sees it that way?" queried the surgeon, delicately.

"Then if Sir Robert were member for Riddsley," Hayward answered
stubbornly, "he'd get his notice to quit, Dr. Pepper! You may bet your
hat on that!"

"There's one got a lesson last night," a new-comer chimed in. "Parson
Colet got so beaten on the moor he's in bed I am told. He's been
speaking free these last two months, and I thought he'd get it. Three
lads from your part I am told, Hayward."

"Well, well!" the farmer replied with philosophy. "There's good in
Colet, and maybe it'll be a lesson to him! Anyway, good or bad, he's
going."

"Going?" cried two or three, speaking at once.

"I met Rector not two hours back. He'd a letter from Colet saying he
was going to preach the same rubbish here as he's fed 'em with at
Brown Heath--cheap bread and the rest of it. Rector's been to him--he
wouldn't budge, and he got his notice to quit right straight. Rector
was fit to burst when I saw him."

"Colet be a born fool!" cried Musters. "Who's like to employ him after
that? Wheat is tithe and the parsons are as fond of their tithe as any
man. You may look a long way before you'll find a parson that's a
repealer."

"Serves Colet right!" said one. "But I'm sorry for him all the same.
There's worse men than the Reverend Colet."

Basset could never say afterwards what moved him at this point, but
whatever it was he got up and went out. The boots was lounging at the
door of the inn. He asked the man where Mr. Colet lodged, and learning
that it was in Stream Street, near the Maypole, he turned that way.




                              CHAPTER XV

                          STRANGE BEDFELLOWS


Had any one told Basset, even that morning, that before night he would
seek the advice of the Riddsley curate, he would have met the
suggestion with unmeasured scorn. Probably he had not since his
college days spent an hour in intimate talk with a man so far from him
in fortune and position, and so unlike him in those things which bring
men together. Nor in the act of approaching Colet--under the impulse
of a few casual words and a sudden thought--was he able to understand
or to justify himself.

But when he rose to his feet after an hour spent beside the curate's
dingy hearth--over the barber's shop in Stream Street--he did not need
to justify the step. He had said little but he had heard much. Colet's
tongue had been loosened by the sacrifice he had made, and inspired by
that love of his kind which takes refuge in the most unlikely shapes,
he had poured forth at length his beliefs and his aspirations. And
Basset, whose world had tottered since morning, for whom common things
had lost their poise and life its wonted aspect, began to think that
he had found in the other's aims a new standpoint and the offer of a
new beginning.

The dip candles, which had been many times snuffed, were burning low
when the two rose. The curate, whose pale cheeks matched his bandaged
head, had a last word to say. "Of the need I am sure," he repeated, as
Basset's eye sought the cheap clock on the mantelpiece. "If I have not
proved that, the fault, sir, is mine. But the means--they are a
question for you; almost any man may see them more clearly than I do.
By votes, it may be, and so through the people working out their own
betterment. Or by social measures, as Lord Ashley thinks, through the
classes that are fitted by education to judge for all. Or by the wider
spread, as I hold, of self-sacrifice by all for all--to me, the ideal.
But of one thing I am convinced; that this tax upon the commonest
food, which takes so much more in proportion from the poor than from
the rich, is wrong. Certainly wrong, Mr. Basset,--unless the gain and
the loss can be equally spread. That's another matter."

"I will not say any more now," Basset answered cautiously, "than that
I am inclined to your view. But for yourself, are there not others who
will not pay so dearly for maintaining it?"

A redness spread over the curate's long horse-face. "No, Mr. Basset,"
he rejoined, "if I left my duty to others I should pay still more
dearly. I am my own man. I will remain so."

"But what will you do when you leave here?" Basset inquired, casting
his eyes round the shabby room. He did not see it as he had seen it on
his entrance. He discerned that, small as it was, and shabby as it
was, it might be a man's home. "I fear that there are few incumbents
who hold your views."

"There are absentees," Colet replied with a smile, "who are not so
particular; and in the north there are a few who think as I think. I
shall not starve."

"I have an old house on the Derbyshire border twenty miles from here,"
Basset said. "A servant and his wife keep it, and during some months
of the year I live there. It is an out-of-the-way place, Mr. Colet,
but it is at your service--if you don't get work?"

The curate seemed to shrink into himself. "I couldn't trespass on
you," he said.

"I hope you will," Basset replied. "In the meantime, who was the man
you quoted a few minutes ago?"

"Francis Place. He is a good man though not as we"--he touched his
threadbare cloth--"count goodness. He is something of a Socialist,
something of a Chartist--he might frighten you, Mr. Basset. But he has
the love of the people in him."

"I will see him."

"He has been a tailor."

That hit Basset fairly in the face. "Good heavens!" he said. "A
tailor?"

"Yes," Colet replied, smiling. "But a very uncommon tailor. Let me
tell you why I quoted him. Because, though he is not a Christian, he
has ideals. He aims higher than he can shoot, while the aims of the
Manchester League, though I agree with them upon the corn-tax, seem to
me to be bounded by the material and warped by their own interests."

Basset nodded. "You have thought a good deal on these things," he
said.

"I live among the poor. I have them always before me."

"And I have thought so little that I need time. You must think no
worse of me if I wait a while. And now, good-night."

But the other did not take the hand held out to him. He was staring at
the candle. "I am not clear that I have been quite frank with you," he
said awkwardly. "You have offered me the shelter of your house though
I am a stranger, Mr. Basset, and though you must suspect that to
harbor me may expose you to remark. Well, I may be tempted to avail
myself of your kindness. But I cannot do so unless you know more of my
circumstances."

"I know all that is necessary."

"You don't know what I am going to tell you," Colet persisted. "And I
think that you should. I am going to marry the daughter of your
uncle's servant, Toft."

"Good Lord!" cried Basset. This was a second and more serious blow. It
brought him down from the clouds.

"That shocks you, Mr. Basset," the curate continued with dignity,
"that I should marry one in her position? Well, I am not called upon
to justify it. Why I think her worthy, and more than worthy to share
my life, is my business. I only trouble you with the matter because
you have made me an offer which you might not have made had you known
this."

Basset did not deny the fact. He could not, indeed. His taste, his
prejudice, his traditions all had received a blow, all were up in
arms; and, for the moment, at any rate he repented of his visit. He
felt that in stepping out of the normal round he had made a mistake.
He should have foreseen, he should have known that he would meet with
such shocks. "You have certainly astonished me," he said after a pause
of dismay. "I cannot think the match suitable, Mr. Colet. May I ask if
my uncle knows of this?"

"Miss Audley knows of it."

"But--you cannot yourself think it suitable!"

"I have," Colet replied dryly, "or rather I had seventy pounds a year.
What girl, born in comfort, gently bred, sheltered from childhood
could I ask to share that? How could I, with so little in the present
and no prospects, ask a gentlewoman to share my lot?"

Basset did not reply, but he was not convinced. A clergyman to marry a
servant, good and refined as Etruria was! It seemed to him to be
unseemly, to be altogether wrong.

Colet too was silent a moment. Then, "I am glad I have told you this,"
he said. "I shall not now trespass on you. On the other hand, I hope
that you may still do something--and with your name, you can do
much--for the good cause. If rumor goes for anything, many will in the
next few months examine the ground on which they stand. It will be
much, if what I have said has weight with you."

He spoke with constraint, but he spoke like a man, and Basset owned
his equality while he resented it. He felt that he ought to renew his
offer of hospitality, but he could not--reserve and shyness had him
again in their grip. He muttered something about thinking it over,
added a word or two of thanks--which were cut short by the flickering
out of the candle--and a minute later he was in the dark deserted
street, and walking back to his inn--not over well content with
himself, if the truth be told.

Either he should not have gone, he felt, or he should have gone the
whole way, sunk his ideas of caste, and carried the thing through.
What was it to him if the man was going to marry a servant?

But that was a detail. The main point was that he should not have
gone. It had been a foolish impulse--he saw it now--which had taken
him to the barber's shop; and one which he might have known that he
would repent. He ought to have foreseen that he could not place
himself on Colet's level without coming into collision with him; that
he could not draw wisdom from him without paying toll.

An impossible person, he thought, a man of ideas quite unlike his own!
And yet the man had spoken well and ably, and spoken from experience.
He had told the things that he had seen as he passed from house to
house, hard, sad facts, the outcome of rising numbers and falling
wages, of over-production, of mouths foodless and unwanted. And all
made worse, as he maintained, by this tax on bread, that barely
touched the rich man's income, yet took a heavy toll from the small
wage.

As he recalled some of the things that he had heard, Basset felt his
interest revive. Colet had dealt with facts; he had attempted no
oratory, he had cast no glamour over them. But he had brought to bear
upon them the light of an ideal--the Christian ideal of unselfishness;
and his hearer, while he doubted, while he did not admit that the
solution was practical, owned its beauty.

For he too, as we know, had had his aspirations, though he had rarely
thought of turning them into action. Instead, he had hidden them
behind the commonplace; and in this he had matched the times, which
were commonplace. For the country lay in the trough of the wave.
Neither the fine fury of the generation which had adored the rights of
man, nor the splendid endurance which the great war had fostered, nor
the lesser ardors of the Reform era, which found its single panacea in
votes, touched or ennobled it. Great wealth and great poverty,
jostling one another, marked a material age, seeking remedies in
material things, despising arms, decrying enthusiasm; an age which
felt, but hardly bowed as yet, to the breath of the new spirit.

But Basset--perhaps because the present offered no great prospect to
the straitened squire--had had his glimpses of a life higher and
finer, devoted to something above the passing whim and the day's
indulgence, a life that should not be useless to those who came after
him. Was it possible that he now heard the call? Could this be the
crusade of which he had idly dreamed? Had the trumpet sounded at the
moment of his utmost need?

If only it were so! During the evening he had kept his sorrow at bay
as well as he could, distracting his thoughts with passing objects.
Now, as the boots ushered him up the close-smelling stairs to the
inn's best room, and he stood in his hat and coat, looking on the cold
bare aspect and the unfamiliar things--he owned himself desolate. The
thought of Mary, of his hopes and plans and of the end of these,
returned upon him in an irresistible flood. The waters which he had
stemmed all day, though all day they had lapped his lips, overwhelmed
him with their bitterness. Mary! He had loved her and she--he knew
what she thought of him.

He could not take up the old life. She had made an end of that, the
rather as from this time onward the Gatehouse would be closed to him
by her presence. And the old house near Wootton where he had been wont
to pass part of his time? That hardly met his needs or his
aspirations. Unhappy as he was, he could not see himself sitting down
in idleness, to brood and to rust in a home so remote, so quiet, so
lost among the stony hills that the country said of it,


                    "Wootton under Weaver
                     Where God came never!"


No, he could hardly face that. Hitherto he had not been called upon to
say what he would do with his life. Now the question was put to him
and he had to answer it. He had to answer it. For many minutes he sat
on the bed staring before him. And from time to time he sighed.




                             CHAPTER XVI

                    THE GREAT HOUSE AT BEAUDELAYS


It was about a week after this that two men stood on the neglected
lawn, contemplating the long blind front of Beaudelays House. With all
its grandeur the house lacked the dignity of ruin, for ruin presumes a
past, and the larger part of the Great House had no past. The ancient
wing that had welcomed brides, and echoed the laughter of children and
given back the sullen notes of the passing-bell did not suffice to
redeem the whole. By night the house might pass; the silent bulk
imposed on the eye. By day it required no effort of fancy to see the
scaffold still clinging to the brickwork, or to discern that the grand
entrance had never opened to guest or neighbor, that everyday life had
never gazed through the blank windows of the long façade.

The house, indeed, was not only dead. It had never lived.

Certainly Nature had done something to shroud the dead. The lawn was
knee-deep in weeds, and the evergreens about it had pushed out
embracing arms to narrow the vista before the windows. At the lower
end of the lawn a paved terrace, the width of the house, promised a
freer air, but even here grass sprouted between the flags, and elders
labored to uproot the stately balustrade that looked on the lower
garden. This garden, once formal, was now a tangle of vegetation, a
wilderness amid whose broad walks Venuses slowly turned to Dryads, and
classic urns lay in fragments, split by the frosts of some excessive
winter. Only the prospect of the Trent Valley and the Derbyshire
foot-hills, visible beyond the pleasance, still pleased; and this view
was vague and sad and distant. For the Great House, as became its
greatness, shunned the public eye, and, lying far back, set a wide
stretch of park between its bounds and the verge of the upland.

One of the two men was the owner. The other who bore a bunch of keys
was Stubbs. Both had a depressed air. It would have been hard to say
which of the two entered more deeply into the sadness of the place.

Presently my lord turned his back on the house. "The view is fine," he
said. "The only fine thing about the place," he added bitterly. "Isn't
there a sort of Belvedere below the garden?"

"There is, my lord. But I fear that it is out of repair."

"Like everything else! There, don't think I'm blaming you for it, man.
You cannot make bricks without straw. But let us look at this
Belvedere."

They descended the steps, and passed slowly along the grass-grown
walk, now and again stepping aside to avoid the clutch of a straggling
rose bough, or the fragments of a broken pillar. They paused to
inspect the sundial, a giant Butterfly with closed wings, a replica of
the stone monster in the Yew Walk. Lord Audley read the inscription,
barely visible through the verdigris that stained the dial-plate:


                        "Non sine sole volo!"


"Just so!" he said. "A short life and a merry one!"

A few paces farther along the walk they stopped to examine the basin
of the great fountain. Cracked from edge to centre, and become a
shallow bed of clay and weeds, it was now as unsightly as it had been
beautiful in the days when fair women leaning over it had fed the gold
fish, or viewed their mirrored faces in its waters.

"The fortunes of the Audleys in a nutshell!" muttered the unlucky
owner. And turning on his heel, "Confound it, Stubbs," he cried, "I
have had as much of this as I can stand! A little more and I shall go
back and cut my throat! It is beginning to rain, too. D--n the
Belvedere! Let us go into the house. That cannot be as bad as this."

Without waiting for an answer, or looking behind him, he strode back
the way they had come. Stubbs followed in silence, and they regained
the lawn.

"I tell you what it is," Audley continued, letting the agent come
abreast of him. "You must find some vulgarian to take the place--iron
man or cotton man, I don't care who he is, if he has got the cash I
You must let it, Stubbs. You must let it! It's a white elephant, it's
the d--ndest White Elephant man ever had!"

The lawyer shook his head. "You may be sure, my lord," he said mildly,
"I should have advised that long ago, if it were possible. But we
couldn't let it in its present state--for a short term; and we have no
more power to lease it for a long one than, as your lordship knows, we
have power to sell it."

The other swore. At the outset he had scarcely felt his poverty. But
he was beginning to feel it. There were moments such as this when his
withers were wrung; when the consequence which the title had brought
failed to soften the hardships of his lot--a poor peer with a vast
house. Had he tried to keep the Great House in repair it would have
swallowed the whole income of the peerage--a sum which, as it was,
barely sufficed for his needs as a bachelor.

Already Stubbs had hinted that there was one way out--a rich marriage.
And Audley had received the hint with the easiness of a man who was in
no haste to marry and might, likely enough, marry where money was. But
once or twice during the last few days, which they had been spending
in a review of the property, my lord had shown irritation. When an old
farmer had said to his face, that he must bring home a bride with a
good fat chest, "and his lordship would be what his forbears had
been," the great man, in place of a laughing answer, had turned glumly
away.

Presently the two halted at the door of the north wing. Stubbs
unlocked it and pushed it open. They entered an ante-room of moderate
size.

"Faugh!" Audley cried. "Open a window! Break one if necessary."

Stubbs succeeded in opening one, and they passed on into the great
hall, a room sixty feet long and open to the roof, a gallery running
round it. A withdrawing-room of half the length opened at one end, and
midway along the inner side a short passage led to a second hall--the
servants' hall--the twin of this. Together they formed an H, and were
probably a Jacobean copy of a Henry the Eighth building. A long table,
some benches, and a score of massive chairs furnished the room.
Between the windows hung a few ragged pictures, and on either side of
the farther door a piece of tapestry hung askew.

Audley looked about him. In this room eighty years before the old lord
had held his revels. The two hearths had glowed with logs, a hundred
wax-lights had shone on silver and glass and the rosy tints of old
wine. Guests in satin and velvet, henchmen and led captains, had
filled it with laughter and jest, and song. With a foot on the table
they had toasted the young king--not stout Farmer George, not the old,
mad monarch, but the gay young sovereign. To-day desolation reigned.
The windows gray with dirt let in a grisly light. All was bare and
cold and rusty--the webs of spiders crossed the very hearths. The old
lord, mouldering in his coffin, was not more unlike that Georgian
reveller than was the room of to-day unlike the room of eighty years
before.

Perhaps the thought struck his descendant. "God! What a
charnel-house!" he cried. "To think that men made merry in this room.
It's a vault, it's a grave! Let us get away from it. What's through,
man?"

They passed into the withdrawing-room, where panels of needlework of
Queen Anne's time, gloomy with age, filled the wall spaces, and a few
pieces of furniture crouched under shrouds of dust. As they stood
gazing two rats leapt from a screen of Cordovan leather that lay in
tatters on the floor. The rats paused an instant to stare at the
intruders, then fled in panic.

The younger man advanced to one of the panels in the wall. "A hunting
scene?" he said. "These may be worth money some day."

The lawyer looked doubtful. "It will be a long day first, I am
afraid," he said. "It's funereal stuff at the best, my lord."

"At any rate it is out of reach of the rats," Lord Audley answered. He
cast a look of distaste at the shreds of the screen. He touched them
with his foot. A third rat sprang out and fled squeaking to covert.
"Oh, d--n!" he said. "Let us see something else."

The lawyer led the way upstairs to the ghostly, echoing gallery that
ran round the hall. They glanced into the principal guest-room, which
was over the drawing-room. Then they went by the short passage of the
H to the range of bedrooms over the servants' hall. For the most part
they opened one from the other.

"The parents slept in the outer and the young ladies in the inner,"
Audley said, smiling. "Gad! it tells a tale of the times!"

Stubbs opened the nearest door and recoiled. "Take care, my lord!" he
said. "Here are the bats!"

"Faugh! What a smell! Can't you keep them out?"

"We tried years ago--I hate them like poison--but it was of no use.
They are in all these upper rooms."

They were. For when Stubbs, humping his shoulders as under a shower,
opened a second door, the bats streamed forth in a long silent
procession, only to stream back again as silently. In a dusky corner
of the second room a cluster, like a huge bunch of grapes, hung to one
of the rafters. Now and again a bat detached itself and joined the
living current that swept without a sound through the shadowy rooms.

"There's nothing beyond these rooms?"

"No."

"Then let us go down. Rats and bats and rottenness! _Non sine sole
volo!_ We may not, but the bats do. Let us go down! Or no! I was
forgetting. Where is the Muniment Room?"

"This way, my lord," Stubbs replied, turning with suspicious
readiness--the bats were his pet aversion. "I brought a candle and
some of the new lucifers. This way, my lord."

He led the way down to a door set in a corner of the ante-room. He
unlocked this and they found themselves at the foot of a circular
staircase. On the farther side of the stairfoot was another door which
led, Stubbs explained, into the servants' quarters. "This turret," he
added, "is older even than the wing, and forms no part of the H. It
was retained because it supplied a second staircase, and also a short
cut from the servants' hall to the entrance. The Muniment Room is over
this lobby on the first floor. Allow me to go first, my lord."

The air was close, but not unpleasant, and the stairs were clean. On
the first floor a low-browed door, clamped and studded with iron,
showed itself. Stubbs halted before it. There was a sputter. A light
shone out. "Wonderful invention!" he said. "Electric telegraph not
more wonderful, though marvellous invention that, my lord."

"Yes," the other answered dryly. "But--when were you here last,
Stubbs?"

"Not for a twelvemonth, my lord."

"Leave your candle?"

"No."

"Then what's that?" The young man pointed to something that lay in the
angle between a stair and the wall.

"God bless my soul!" the lawyer cried. "It's a candle."

"And clean. It has not been there a week. Who has been here, my
friend?"

Stubbs reflected. "No one with my authority," he said. "But if the
devil himself has been here," he continued, stoutly recovering
himself, "he can have done no harm. I can prove that in five minutes,
my lord--if you will kindly hold the light." He inserted a large key
in the lock, and with an effort, he shot back the bolts. He pushed
open the door and signed to Lord Audley to enter.

He did so, and Stubbs followed. They stood and looked about them. They
were in a whitewashed chamber twelve feet square, clean, bare, empty.
The walls gave back the light so that the one candle lit the place
perfectly.

"It's as good as air-tight," Stubbs said with pride. "And you see, my
lord, we swept it as bare as the palm of my hand. I can answer for it
that not a shred of paper or a piece of wax was left."

Audley, gazing about him, seemed satisfied. His face relaxed. "Yes,"
he said, "you could not overlook anything in a place like this. I'm
glad I've seen it."

He was turning to go when a thought struck him. He lowered the light
and scanned the floor. "All the same, somebody has been here!" he
exclaimed. "There's one of the things you are so pleased with--a
lucifer!"

Stubbs stooped and looked. "A lucifer?" he repeated. He picked up the
bit of charred wood and examined it. "Now how did that come here? I
never used one till six months ago."

My lord frowned. "Who is it?" he asked.

"Some one, I fear, who has had a key made," the agent answered,
shaking his head,

"I can see that for myself. But has he learned anything?"

Stubbs stared. "There's nothing to learn, my lord," he said. "You can
see that. Whoever he is, he has cracked the nut and found no kernel!"

The young man looked round him again. He nodded. "I suppose so," he
said. But he seemed ill at ease and inclined to find fault. He threw
the light of the candle this way and that, as if he expected the clean
white walls to tell a tale. "What's that?" he asked suddenly. "A
crack? Or what?"

Stubbs looked, passed his hand over the mark on the wall, effaced it.
"No, my lord, a cobweb," he said. "Nothing."

There was no more to be seen, yet Audley seemed loth to go. At length
he turned and went out. Stubbs closed and locked the door behind them,
then he took the candle from his lordship and invited him to go down
before him. Still the young man hesitated. "I suppose we can learn
nothing more?" he said.

"Nothing, my lord," Stubbs answered. "To tell you the truth, I have
long thought Mr. John mad, and it is possible that his madness has
taken this turn. But I am equally sure that there is nothing for him
to discover, if he spends every day of his life here."

"All the same I don't like it," the owner objected. "Whoever has been
here has no right here. It is odd that I had some notion of this
before we came. You may depend upon it that this was why he fixed
himself at the Gatehouse."

"He may have had something of the sort in his mind," Stubbs admitted.
"But I don't think so, my lord. More probably, being here and idle, he
took to wandering in for lack of something to do."

"And by and by, had a key made and strayed into the Muniment Room! No,
that won't do, Stubbs. And frankly there should be closer supervision
here. It should not have remained for me to discover this."

He began to descend, leaving Stubbs to digest the remark; who for his
part thought honestly that too much was being made of the matter.
Probably the intruder was John Audley; the man had a bee in his
bonnet, and what more likely than that he should be taken with a craze
to haunt the house which he believed was his own? But the agent was
too prudent to defend himself while the young man's vexation was
fresh. He followed him down in silence, and before many minutes had
passed, they were in the open air, and had locked the door behind
them.

Clouds hung low on the tops of the trees, mist veiled the view, and a
small rain was falling on the wet lawn. Nevertheless the young man
moved into the open. "Come this way," he said.

The lawyer turned up the collar of his coat and followed him
unwillingly. "Where does he get in?" my lord asked. It seemed as if
the longer he dwelt on the matter the less he liked it. "Not by that
door--the lock is rusty. The key had shrieked in it. Probably he
enters by one of the windows in the new part."

He walked towards the middle of the lawn and Stubbs, thankful that he
wore Wellington boots, followed him.

The lawyer thought that he had never seen the house wear so dreary an
aspect as it wore under the gray weeping sky. But his lordship was
more practical. "These windows look the most likely," he said after a
short survey: and he dragged his unwilling attendant to the point he
had marked.

A nearer view strengthened his suspicions. On the sill of one of the
windows were scratches and stains. "You see?" he said. "It should not
have been left to me to discover this! Probably John Audley comes from
the Gatehouse by the Yew Walk." He turned to measure the distance with
his eye, the distance which divided the spot from the Iron Gate.
"That's it," he said, "he comes----"

Then, "Good G--d!" he muttered. "Look! Look!" Stubbs looked. They both
looked. Beyond the lawn, on the farther side of the iron grille and
clinging to it with both hands, a man stood bareheaded under the rain.
Whether he had come uncovered, or his hat had been jerked from him by
some movement caused by their appearance, they could not tell; nor how
long he had stood thus, gazing at them through the bars. But they
could see that his eyes never wavered, that his hands gripped the
iron, and the two knew by instinct that in the intensity of his hate,
the man was insensible alike to the rain that drenched him, and to the
wind that blew out the skirts of his thin black coat.

Even Stubbs held his breath. Even he felt that there was something
uncanny and ominous in the appearance. For the gazer was John Audley.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                            TO THE RESCUE


Stubbs was the first to collect himself, but a minute elapsed before
he spoke. Then, "He must be mad," he cried, "mad, to expose himself to
the weather at his age. If I had not seen it, I couldn't believe it!"

"I suppose it is John Audley?"

"Yes." Then raising his voice, "My lord! I don't think I would go to
him now!"

But Audley was already striding across the lawn towards the gate. The
lawyer hesitated, gave way, and followed him.

They were within twenty paces of the silent watcher when he moved--up
to that time he might have been a lay figure. He shook one hand in the
air, as if he would beat them off, then he turned and walked stiffly
away. Half a dozen steps took him out of sight. The Yew Walk swallowed
him.

But, quickly as he vanished, the lawyer had had time to see that he
staggered. "I fear, my lord, he is ill," he said. "He will never reach
the Gatehouse in that state. I had better follow him."

"Why the devil did he come here?" Audley retorted savagely. The
watcher's strange aspect, his face, white against the dark yews, his
stillness, his gesture, a something ominous in all, had shaken him.
"If he had stopped at home----"

"Still----"

"D--n him, it's his affair!"

"Still we cannot leave him if he has fallen, my lord," Stubbs replied
with decision. And without waiting for his employer's assent he tried
the gate. It was locked, but in a trice he found the key on his bunch,
turned it, and pushed back the gate. Audley noticed that it moved
silently on its hinges.

Stubbs, the gate open, began to feel ashamed of his impulse. Probably
there was nothing amiss after all. But he had hardly looked along the
path before he uttered a cry, and hurrying forward, stooped over a
bundle of clothes that lay in the middle of the walk. It was John
Audley. Apparently he had tripped over a root and lain where he had
fallen.

Stubbs's cry summoned the other, who followed him through the gate, to
find him on his knees supporting the old man's head. The sight
recalled Audley to his better self. The mottled face, the staring
eyes, the helpless limbs shocked him. "Good G--d!" he cried, "you were
right, Stubbs! He might have died if we had left him."

"He would have died," Stubbs answered. "As it is--I am not sure." He
opened the waistcoat, felt for the beating of the heart, bent his ear
to it. "No, I don't think he's gone," he said, "but the heart is
feeble, very feeble. We must have brandy! My lord, you are the more
active. Will you go to the Gatehouse--there is no nearer place--and
get some? And something to carry him home! A hurdle if there is
nothing better, and a couple of men?"

"Right!" Audley cried.

"And don't lose a minute, my lord! He's nearly gone."

Audley stripped off his overcoat. "Wrap this about him!" he said. And
before the other could answer he had started for the Gatehouse, at a
pace which he believed that he could keep up.

Pad, pad, my lord ran under the yew trees, swish, swish across the
soaking grass, about the great Butterfly. Pad, pad, again through the
gloom under the yews! Not too fast, he told himself--he was a big man
and he must save himself. Now he saw before him the opening into the
park, and the light falling on the pale turf. And then, at a point not
more than twenty yards short of the open ground, he tripped over a
root, tried to recover himself, struck another root, and fell.

The fall shook him, but he was young, and he was quickly on his feet.
He paused an instant to brush the dirt from his hands and knees; and
it was during that instant that his inbred fear of John Audley, and
the certainty that if John Audley died he need fear no more, rose
before him.

Yes, if he died--this man who was even now plotting against him--there
was an end of that fear! There was an end of uneasiness, of anxiety,
of the alarm that assailed him in the small hours, of the forebodings
that showed him stripped of title and income and consequence. Stripped
of all!

Five seconds passed, and he still stood, engaged with his hands. Five
more; it was his knees he was brushing now--and very carefully.
Another five--the sweat broke out on his brow though the day was cold.
Twenty seconds, twenty-five! His face showed white in the gloom. And
still he stood. He glanced behind him. No one could see him.

But the movement discovered the man to himself, and with an oath he
broke away. He thrust the damning thought from him, he sprang forward.
He ran. In ten strides he was in the open park, and trotting steadily,
his elbows to his sides, across the sward. The blessed light was about
him, the wind swept past his ears, the cleansing rain whipped his
face. Thank God, he had left behind him the heavy air and noisome
scent of the yews. He hated them. He would cut them all down some day.

For in a strange way he associated them with the temptation which had
assailed him. And he was thankful, most thankful, that he had put that
temptation from him--had put it from him, when most men, he thought,
would have succumbed to it. Thank God, he had not! The farther he
went, indeed, the better he felt. By the time he saw the Gatehouse
before him, he was sure that few men, exposed to that temptation,
would have overcome it. For if John Audley died what a relief it would
be! And he had looked very ill; he had looked like a man at the point
of death. The brandy could not reach him under--well, under half an
hour. Half an hour was a long time, when a man looked like that. "I'll
do my best," he thought. "Then if he dies, well and good. I've always
been afraid of him."

He did not spare himself, but he was not in training, and he was well
winded when he reached the Gatehouse. A last effort carried him
between the Butterflies, and he halted on the flags of the courtyard.
A woman, whose skirts were visible, but whose head and shoulders were
hidden by an umbrella, was standing in the doorway on his left,
speaking to some one in the house. She heard his footsteps and turned.

"Lord Audley!" she exclaimed--for it was Mary Audley. Then with a
woman's quickness, "You have come from my uncle?" she cried. "Is he
ill?"

Audley nodded. "I am come for some brandy," he gasped.

She did not waste a moment. She sped into the house, and to the
dining-room. "I had missed him," she cried over her shoulder. "The
man-servant is away. I hoped he might be with him."

In a trice she had opened a cellarette and taken from it a decanter of
brandy. Then she saw that he could not carry this at any speed, and
she turned to the sideboard and took a wicker flask from a drawer.
With a steady hand and without the loss of a minute--he found her
presence of mind admirable--she filled this.

As she corked it, Mrs. Toft appeared, wiping her hands on her apron.
"Dear, dear, miss," she said, "is the master bad? But it's no wonder
when he, that doesn't quit the fire for a week together, goes out like
this? And Toft away and all!" She stared at his lordship. Probably she
knew him by sight.

"Will you get his bed warmed, Mrs. Toft," Mary answered. She gave Lord
Audley the flask. "Please don't lose a moment," she urged. "I am
following--oh yes, I am. But you will go faster."

She had not a thought, he saw, for the disorder of her dress, or for
her hair dishevelled by the wind, and scarce a thought for him. He
decided that he had never seen her to such advantage, but it was no
time for compliments, nor was she in the mood for them. Without more
he nodded and set off on his return journey--he had not been in the
house three minutes. By and by he looked back, and saw that Mary was
following on his heels. She had snatched up a sun-bonnet, discarded
the umbrella, and, heedless of the rain, was coming after him as
swiftly and lightly as Atalanta of the golden apple. "Gad, she's not
one of the fainting sort!" he reflected; and also that if he had given
way to that d--d temptation he could not have looked her in the face.
"As it is," his mind ran, "what are the odds the old boy's not dead
when we get there? If he is--I am safe! If he is not, I might do worse
than think of her. It would checkmate him finely. More"--he looked
again over his shoulder--"she's a fine mover, by Gad, and her figure's
perfect! Even that rag on her head don't spoil her!" Whereupon he
thought of a certain Lady Adela with whom he was very friendly, who
had political connections and would some day have a plum. The
comparison was not, in the matter of fineness and figure, to Lady
Adela's advantage. Her lines were rather on the Flemish side.

Meanwhile Mary was feeling anything but an Atalanta. Wind and rain and
wet grass, loosened hair and swaying skirts do not make for romance.
But in her anxiety she gave small thought to these. Her one instinct
was to help. With all his oddity her uncle had been kind to her, and
she longed to show him that she was grateful. And he was her one
relative. She had no one else in the world. He had given her what of
home he had, and ease, and a security which she had never known
before. Were she to lose him now--the mere fancy spurred her to fresh
exertions, and in spite of a pain in her side, in spite of clinging
skirts, and shoes that threatened to leave her feet, she pushed on.
She was not far behind Audley when he reached the Yew Walk.

She saw him plunge into it, she followed, and was on the scene not
many seconds later. When she caught sight of the little group kneeling
about the prostrate man, that sense of tragedy, and of the inevitable,
which assails at such a time, shook her. The thing always possible,
never expected, had happened at last.

Then the coolness which women find in these emergencies returned. She
knelt between the men, took the insensible head on her arm, held out
