simple delicacy I did expect," she said.

And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant.  She could not recall her answer, but at that point,
with an unmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:

"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that's
true, because I see it's unnatural."

The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up
for herself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life,
the injustice with which he had accused her of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused her.

"I am very sorry that nothing but what's coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of
the room.

When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not
referred to the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been
smoothed over, but was not at an end.

Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely
and wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to
forget it all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she
wanted to throw the blame on herself and to justify him.

"I am myself to blame.  I'm irritable, I'm insanely jealous.  I
will make it up with him, and we'll go away to the country; there
I shall be more at peace."

"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her
most of all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound
her with which it was said.  "I know what he meant; he meant--
unnatural, not loving my own daughter, to love another person's
child.  What does he know of love for children, of my love for
Seryozha, whom I've sacrificed for him?  But that wish to wound
me!  No, he loves another woman, it must be so."

And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind,
she had gone round the same circle that she had been round so
often before, and had come back to her former state of
exasperation, she was horrified at herself.  "Can it be
impossible?  Can it be beyond me to control myself?" she said to
herself, and began again from the beginning.  "He's truthful,
he's honest, he loves me.  I love him, and in a few days the
divorce will come.  What more do I want?  I want peace of mind
and trust, and I will take the blame on myself.  Yes, now when he
comes in, I will tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong,
and we will go away tomorrow."

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by
irritability, she rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up
for packing their things for the country.

At ten o'clock Vronsky came in.



Chapter 24


"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a
penitent and meek expression.

"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in
one of her good moods.  He was used by now to these transitions,
and he was particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a
specially good humor himself.

"What do I see?  Come, that's good!" he said, pointing to the
boxes in the passage.

"Yes, we must go.  I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I
longed to be in the country.  There's nothing to keep you, is
there?"

"It's the one thing I desire.  I'll be back directly, and we'll
talk it over; I only want to change my coat.  Order some tea."

And he went into his room.

There was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come,
that's good," as one says to a child when it leaves off being
naughty, and still more mortifying was the contrast between her
penitent and his self-confident tone; and for one instant she
felt the lust of strife rising up in her again, but making an
effort she conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly as
before.

When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had
prepared beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for
going away.

"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said.
"Why wait here for the divorce?  Won't it be just the same in the
country?  I can't wait any longer!  I don't want to go on hoping,
I don't want to hear anything about the divorce.  I have made up
my mind it shall not have any more influence on my life.  Do you
agree?"

"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.

"What did you do?  Who was there?" she said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests.  "The dinner was
first rate, and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough,
but in Moscow they can never do anything without something
_ridicule_.  A lady of a sort appeared on the scene, teacher of
swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her
skill."

"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous
too.  So when shall we go?"

"What an absurd fancy!  Why, did she swim in some special way,
then?" said Anna, not answering.

"There was absolutely nothing in it.  That's just what I say, it
was awfully stupid.  Well, then, when do you think of going?"

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some
unpleasant idea.

"When?  Why, the sooner the better!  By tomorrow we shan't be
ready.  The day after tomorrow."

"Yes...oh, no, wait a minute!  The day after to-morrow's Sunday,
I have to be at maman's," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as
soon as he uttered his mother's name he was aware of her intent,
suspicious eyes.  His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion.  She
flushed hotly and drew away from him.  It was now not the Queen
of Sweden's swimming-mistress who filled Anna's imagination, but
the young Princess Sorokina.  She was staying in a village near
Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

"Can't you go tomorrow?" she said.

"Well, no!  The deeds and the money for the business I'm going
there for I can't get by tomorrow," he answered.

"If so, we won't go at all."

"But why so?"

"I shall not go later.  Monday or never!"

"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement.  "Why, there's
no meaning in it!"

"There's no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for
me.  You don't care to understand my life.  The one thing that I
cared for here was Hannah.  You say it's affectation.  Why, you
said yesterday that I don't love my daughter, that I love this
English girl, that it's unnatural.  I should like to know what
life there is for me that could be natural!"

For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and
was horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution.
But even though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not
restrain herself, could not keep herself from proving to him that
he was wrong, could not give way to him.

"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion."

"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you
don't tell the truth?"

"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly,
restraining his rising anger.  "It's a great pity if you can't
respect..."

"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should
be.  And if you don't love me any more, it would be better and
more honest to say so."

"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from
his chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking
deliberately: "What do you try my patience for?" looking as
though he might have said much more, but was restraining himself.
"It has limits."

"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his
cruel, menacing eyes.

"I mean to say..." he was beginning, but he checked himself.  "I
must ask what it is you want of me?"

"What can I want?  All I can want is that you should not desert
me, as you think of doing," she said, understanding all he had
not uttered.  "But that I don't want; that's secondary.  I want
love, and there is none.  So then all is over."

She turned towards the door.

"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines
of his brows, though he held her by the hand.  "What is it all
about?  I said that we must put off going for three days, and on
that you told me I was lying, that I was not an honorable man."

"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having
sacrificed everything for me," she said, recalling the words of a
still earlier quarrel, "that he's worse than a dishonorable man--
he's a heartless man."

"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go
her hand.

"He hates me, that's clear," she thought, and in silence, without
looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room.
"He loves another woman, that's even clearer," she said to
herself as she went into her own room.  "I want love, and there
is none.  So, then, all is over."  She repeated the words she had
said, "and it must be ended."

"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair
before the looking glass.

Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had
brought her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what
_he_ was doing now alone in his study; whether this was the final
quarrel, or whether reconciliation were still possible; and of
what all her old friends at Petersburg would say of her now; and
of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other
ideas of what would happen now after this rupture, came into her
head; but she did not give herself up to them with all her heart.
At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea that alone
interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the
time of her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which
never left her at that time.  "Why didn't I die?" and the words
and the feeling of that time came back to her.  And all at once
she knew what was in her soul.  Yes, it was that idea which alone
solved all.  "Yes, to die!...  And the shame and disgrace of
Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, it
will all be saved by death.  To die! and he will feel remorse;
will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."  With
the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left
hand, vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after
her death.

Approaching footsteps--his steps--distracted her attention.  As
though absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even
turn to him.

He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:

"Anna, we'll go the day after tomorrow, if you like.  I agree
to everything."

She did not speak.

"What is it?" he urged.

"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
herself any longer, she burst into sobs.

"Cast me off!" she articulated between her sobs.  "I'll go away
tomorrow...I'll do more.  What am I?  An immoral woman!  A stone
round your neck.  I don't want to make you wretched, I don't want
to!  I'll set you free.  You don't love me; you love someone
else!"

Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no
trace of foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased,
and never would cease, to love her; that he loved her more than
ever.

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing
her hands.  There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied
she caught the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet
on her hand.  And instantly Anna's despairing jealousy changed to
a despairing passion of tenderness.  She put her arms round him,
and covered with kisses his head, his neck, his hands.



Chapter 25


Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly
to work in the morning preparing for their departure.  Though it
was not settled whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as
they had each given way to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling
absolutely indifferent whether they went a day earlier or later.
She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out
of it, when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed
to go out.

"I'm going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money by
Yegorov.  And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.

Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to
his mother's gave her a pang.

"No, I shan't be ready by then myself," she said; and at once
reflected, "so then it was possible to arrange to do as I
wished."  "No, do as you meant to do.  Go into the dining room,
I'm coming directly.  It's only to turn out those things that
aren't wanted," she said, putting something more on the heap of
frippery that lay in Annushka's arms.

Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-
room.

"You wouldn't believe how distasteful these rooms have become to
me," she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee.  "There's
nothing more awful than these _chambres garnies_.  There's no
individuality in them, no soul.  These clocks, and curtains, and,
worst of all, the wallpapers--they're a nightmare.  I think of
Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land.  You're not sending the
horses off yet?"

"No, they will come after us.  Where are you going to?"

"I wanted to go to Wilson's to take some dresses to her.  So it's
really to be tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but
suddenly her face changed.

Vronsky's valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a
telegram from Petersburg.  There was nothing out of the way in
Vronsky's getting a telegram, but he said, as though anxious to
conceal something from her, that the receipt was in his study,
and he turned hurriedly to her.

"By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all."

"From whom is the telegram?" she asked, not hearing him.

"From Stiva," he answered reluctantly.

"Why didn't you show it to me?  What secret can there be between
Stiva and me?"

Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the
telegram.

"I didn't want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a
passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?"

"About the divorce?"

"Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet.
He has promised a decisive answer in a day or two.  But here it
is; read it."

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what
Vronsky had told her.  At the end was added: "Little hope; but
I will do everything possible and impossible."

"I said yesterday that it's absolutely nothing to me when I get,
or whether I never get, a divorce," she said, flushing crimson.
"There was not the slightest necessity to hide it from me."  "So
he may hide and does hide his correspondence with women from me,"
she thought.

"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky;
"I believe he's won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay,
about sixty thousand."

"No," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this
change of subject that he was irritated, "why did you suppose
that this news would affect me so, that you must even try to
hide it?  I said I don't want to consider it, and I should have
liked you to care as little about it as I do."

"I care about it because I like definiteness," he said.

"Definiteness is not in the form but the love," she said, more
and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool
composure in which he spoke.  "What do you want it for?"

"My God! love again," he thought, frowning.

"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children's in the
future."

"There won't be children in the future."

"That's a great pity," he said.

"You want it for the children's sake, but you don't think of me?"
she said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said,
"_for your sake_ and the children's."

The question of the possibility of having children had long been
a subject of dispute and irritation to her.  His desire to have
children she interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.

"Oh, I said: for your sake.  Above all for your sake," he
repeated, frowning as though in pain, "because I am certain that
the greater part of your irritability comes from the
indefiniteness of the position."

"Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred
for me is apparent," she thought, not hearing his words, but
watching with terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her
out of his eyes.

"The cause is not that," she said, "and, indeed, I don't see how
the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am
completely in your power.  What indefiniteness is there in the
position? on the contrary..."

"I am very sorry that you don't care to understand," he
interrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his
thought.  "The indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I
am free."

"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," she said,
and turning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.

She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it
to her lips.  After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and
by his expression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her
hand, and her gesture, and the sound made by her lips.

"I don't care in the least what your mother thinks, and what
match she wants to make for you," she said, putting the cup down
with a shaking hand.

"But we are not talking about that."

"Yes, that's just what we are talking about.  And let me tell you
that a heartless woman, whether she's old or not old, your mother
or anyone else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not
consent to know her."

"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."

"A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son's happiness
and honor lie has no heart."

"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of
my mother, whom I respect," he said, raising his voice and
looking sternly at her.

She did not answer.  Looking intently at him, at his face, his
hands, she recalled all the details of their reconciliation the
previous day, and his passionate caresses.  "There, just such
caresses he has lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on
other women!" she thought.

"You don't love your mother.  That's all talk, and talk, and
talk!" she said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.

"Even if so, you must..."

"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have
gone away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room.  Anna
greeted him and remained.

Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was
standing at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful
consequences--why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances
before an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all--she did
not know.  But at once quelling the storm within her, she sat
down and began talking to their guest.

"Well, how are you getting on?  Has your debt been paid you?" she
asked Yashvin.

"Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan't get it all, but I shall get a
good half.  And when are you off?" said Yashvin, looking at
Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

"The day after tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.

"You've been meaning to go so long, though."

"But now it's quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight
in the face with a look which told him not to dream of the
possibility of reconciliation.

"Don't you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" she went on,
talking to Yashvin.

"I've never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether
I'm sorry for him or not.  You see, all my fortune's here"--he
touched his breast pocket--"and just now I'm a wealthy man.  But
today I'm going to the club, and I may come out a beggar.  You
see, whoever sits down to play with me--he wants to leave me
without a shirt to my back, and so do I him.  And so we fight it
out, and that's the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be
for your wife?"

Yashvin laughed.

"That's why I'm not married, and never mean to be."

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation
and glancing at Anna's smiling face.  Meeting his eyes, Anna's
face instantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were
saying to him:  "It's not forgotten.  It's all the same."

"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.

"Oh heavens! ever so many times!  But you see, some men can play
but only so that they can always lay down their cards when the
hour of a _rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only
so as not to be late for my cards in the evening.  That's how I
manage things."

"No, I didn't mean that, but the real thing."  She would have
said _Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in.  Anna got up and went
out of the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room.  She would
have pretended to be looking for something on the table, but
ashamed of making a pretense, she looked straight in his face
with cold eyes.

"What do you want?" she asked in French.

"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I've sold him," he said, in a
tone which said more clearly than words, "I've no time for
discussing things, and it would lead to nothing."

"I'm not to blame in any way," he thought.  "If she will punish
herself, _tant pis pour elle._"  But as he was going he fancied
that she said something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity
for her.

"Eh, Anna?" he queried.

"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.

"Oh, nothing, tant pis then," he thought, feeling cold again, and
he turned and went out.  As he was going out he caught a glimpse
in the looking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips.  He
even wanted to stop and to say some comforting word to her, but
his legs carried him out of the room before he could think what
to say.  The whole of that day he spent away from home, and when
he came in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna
Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in to her.



Chapter 26


Never before had a day been passed in quarrel.  Today was the
first time.  And this was not a quarrel.  It was the open
acknowledgment of complete coldness.  Was it possible to glance
at her as he had glanced when he came into the room for the
guarantee?--to look at her, see her heart was breaking with
despair, and go out without a word with that face of callous
composure?  He was not merely cold to her, he hated her because
he loved another woman--that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied,
too, the words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could
have said to her, and she grew more and more exasperated.

"I won't prevent you," he might say.  "You can go where you like.
You were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so
that you might go back to him.  Go back to him.  If you want
money, I'll give it to you.  How many roubles do you want?"

All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to
her in her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them,
as though he had actually said them.

"But didn't he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful
and sincere man?  Haven't I despaired for nothing many times
already?" she said to herself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson's, which occupied
two hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or
whether there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she
should go away at once or see him once more.  She was expecting
him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went to her own
room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said to
herself, "If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means
that he loves me still.  If not, it means that all is over, and
then I will decide what I'm to do!..."

In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the
entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the
servant; he believed what was told him, did not care to find out
more, and went to his own room.  So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole
means of bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing
him and of gaining the victory in that strife which the evil
spirit in possession of her heart was waging with him.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe,
getting or not getting a divorce from her husband--all that did
not matter.  The one thing that mattered was punishing him.  When
she poured herself out her usual dose of opium, and thought that
she had only to drink off the whole bottle to die, it seemed to
her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on
how he would suffer, and repent and love her memory when it would
be too late.  She lay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a
single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice of the
ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she
would be no more, when she would be only a memory to him.  "How
could I say such cruel things to her?" he would say.  "How could
I go out of the room without saying anything to her?  But now she
is no more.  She has gone away from us forever.  She is...."
Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered, pounced on the whole
cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows from the other side
swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows flitted back, but
then with fresh swiftness they darted forward, wavered,
commingled, and all was darkness.  "Death!" she thought.  And
such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not
realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of
the one that had burned down and gone out.  "No, anything--only
to live!  Why, I love him!  Why, he loves me!  This has been
before and will pass," she said, feeling that tears of joy at the
return to life were trickling down her cheeks.  And to escape
from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.

He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly.  She went up to him,
and holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at
him.  Now when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight
of him she could not keep back tears of tenderness.  But she knew
that if he waked up he would look at her with cold eyes,
convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her
love, she would have to prove to him that he had been wrong in
his treatment of her.  Without waking him, she went back, and
after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had
recurred several times in her dreams, even before her connection
with Vronsky.  A little old man with unkempt beard was doing
something bent down over some iron, muttering meaningless French
words, and she, as she always did in this nightmare (it was what
made the horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no
notice of her, but was doing something horrible with the iron--
over her.  And she waked up in a cold sweat.

When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though
veiled in mist.

"There was a quarrel.  Just what has happened several times.  I
said I had a headache, and he did not come in to see me.
Tomorrow we're going away; I must see him and get ready for the
journey," she said to herself.  And learning that he was in his
study, she went down to him.  As she passed through the
drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and
looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a
young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction
to the footman ringing the bell.  After a parley in the hall,
someone came upstairs, and Vronsky's steps could be heard passing
the drawing room.  He went rapidly downstairs.  Anna went again
to the window.  She saw him come out onto the steps without his
hat and go up to the carriage.  The young girl in the lilac hat
handed him a parcel.  Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted
suddenly.  The feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with
a fresh pang.  She could not understand now how she could have
lowered herself by spending a whole day with him in his house.
She went into his room to announce her determination.

"That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter.  They came and
brought me the money and the deeds from maman.  I couldn't get
them yesterday.  How is your head, better?" he said quietly, not
wishing to see and to understand the gloomy and solemn expression
of her face.

She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of
the room.  He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on
reading a letter.  She turned, and went deliberately out of the
room.  He still might have turned her back, but she had reached
the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible was the
rustling of the note paper as he turned it.

"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the
doorway, "we're going tomorrow for certain, aren't we?"

"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.

"Anna, we can't go on like this..."

"You, but not I," she repeated.

"This is getting unbearable!"

"You...you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words
were uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on
second thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth.  This
vulgar--as he thought it--threat of something vague exasperated
him.  "I've tried everything," he thought; "the only thing left
is not to pay attention," and he began to get ready to drive into
town, and again to his mother's to get her signature to the
deeds.

She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining
room.  At the drawing room he stood still.  But he did not turn
in to see her, he merely gave an order that the horse should be
given to Voytov if he came while he was away.  Then she heard the
carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came out again.
But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running
upstairs.  It was the valet running up for his gloves that had
been forgotten.  She went to the window and saw him take the
gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back he
said something to him.  Then without looking up at the window he
settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his
legs crossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the
corner.



Chapter 27


"He has gone!  It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the
window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the
darkness when the candle had flickered out, and of her fearful
dream mingling into one, filled her heart with cold terror.

"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang
the bell.  She was so afraid now of being alone, that without
waiting for the servant to come in, she went out to meet him.

"Inquire where the count has gone," she said.  The servant
answered that the count had gone to the stable.

"His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage
would be back immediately."

"Very good.  Wait a minute.  I'll write a note at once.  Send
Mihail with the note to the stables.  Make haste."

She sat down and wrote:

"I was wrong.  Come back home; I must explain.  For God's sake
come! I'm afraid."

She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant
out of the room, and went to the nursery.

"Why, this isn't it, this isn't he!  Where are his blue eyes, his
sweet, shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby,
rosy little girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha,
whom in the tangle of her ideas she had expected to see in the
nursery.  The little girl sitting at the table was obstinately
and violently battering on it with a cork, and staring aimlessly
at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.  Answering the English
nurse that she was quite well, and that she was going to the
country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and began
spinning the cork to show her.  But the child's loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so
vividly that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went
away.  "Can it be all over?  No, it cannot be!" she thought.  "He
will come back.  But how can he explain that smile, that
excitement after he had been talking to her?  But even if he
doesn't explain, I will believe.  If I don't believe, there's
only one thing left for me, and I can't."

She looked at her watch.  Twenty minutes had passed.  "By now he
has received the note and is coming back.  Not long, ten minutes
more....  But what if he doesn't come?  No, that cannot be.  He
mustn't see me with tear-stained eyes.  I'll go and wash.  Yes,
yes; did I do my hair or not?" she asked herself.  And she could
not remember.  She felt her head with her hand.  "Yes, my hair
has been done, but when I did it I can't in the least remember."
She could not believe the evidence of her hand, and went up to
the pier glass to see whether she really had done her hair.  She
certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
"Who's that?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the
swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a
scared way at her.  "Why, it's I!" she suddenly understood, and
looking round, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her,
and twitched her shoulders, shuddering.  Then she lifted her hand
to her lips and kissed it.

"What is it?  Why, I'm going out of my mind!" and she went into
her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she
stared at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.

"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as
though she understood.

"Darya Alexandrovna?  Yes, I'll go."

"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back.  He's coming, he'll
be here soon."  She took out her watch and looked at it.  "But
how could he go away, leaving me in such a state?  How can he
live, without making it up with me?"  She went to the window and
began looking into the street.  Judging by the time, he might be
back now.  But her calculations might be wrong, and she began
once more to recall when he had started and to count the minutes.

At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare
it with her watch, someone drove up.  Glancing out of the window,
she saw his carriage.  But no one came upstairs, and voices could
be heard below.  It was the messenger who had come back in the
carriage.  She went down to him.

"We didn't catch the count.  The count had driven off on the
lower city road."

"What do you say?  What!..." she said to the rosy, good-humored
Mihail, as he handed her back her note.

"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.

"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya's place, you know? and
bring an answer back immediately," she said to the messenger.

"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought.  "Yes, I'm going to
Dolly's, that's true or else I shall go out of my mind.  Yes, and
I can telegraph, too."  And she wrote a telegram.  "I absolutely
must talk to you; come at once."  After sending off the telegram,
she went to dress.  When she was dressed and in her hat, she
glanced again into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking
Annushka.  There was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured
little gray eyes.

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna?  Why, there's nothing out
of the way.  You drive out a little, and it'll cheer you up,"
said the maid.

"Yes, I'm going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up.
"And if there's a telegram while I'm away, send it on to Darya
Alexandrovna's...but no, I shall be back myself."

"Yes, I mustn't think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and
most of all, get out of this house," she said, feeling with
terror the strange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she
made haste to go out and get into the carriage.

"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys'."



Chapter 28


It was bright and sunny.  A fine rain had been falling all the
morning, and now it had not long cleared up.  The iron roofs, the
flags of the roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and
leather, the brass and the tinplate of the carriages--all
glistened brightly in the May sunshine.  It was three o'clock,
and the very liveliest time in the streets.

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly
swayed on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in
the midst of the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing
impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over the events of the last
days, and she saw her position quite differently from how it had
seemed at home.  Now the thought of death seemed no longer so
terrible and so clear to her, and death itself no longer seemed
so inevitable.  Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to
which she had lowered herself.  "I entreat him to forgive me.  I
have given in to him.  I have owned myself in fault.  What for?
Can't I live without him?"  And leaving unanswered the question
how she was going to live without him, she fell to reading the
signs on the shops.  "Office and warehouse.  Dental surgeon.
Yes, I'll tell Dolly all about it.  She doesn't like Vronsky.  I
shall be sick and ashamed, but I'll tell her.  She loves me, and
I'll follow her advice.  I won't give in to him; I won't let him
train me as he pleases.  Filippov, bun shop.  They say they send
their dough to Petersburg.  The Moscow water is so good for it.
Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of
seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa.  "Riding, too.
Was that really me, with red hands?  How much that seemed to me
then splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what
I had then has gone out of my reach forever!  Could I ever have
believed then that I could come to such humiliation?  How
conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he gets my note!
But I will show him....  How horrid that paint smells!  Why is it
they're always painting and building?  _Modes et robes,_" she read.
A man bowed to her.  It was Annushka's husband.  "Our parasites";
she remembered how Vronsky had said that.  "Our?  Why our?
What's so awful is that one can't tear up the past by its roots.
One can't tear it out, but one can hide one's memory of it.  And
I'll hide it."  And then she thought of her past with Alexey
Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the memory of it out of
her life.  "Dolly will think I'm leaving my second husband, and
so I certainly must be in the wrong.  As if I cared to be right!
I can't help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry.  But at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling
about.  "Love, most likely.  They don't know how dreary it is,
how low....  The boulevard and the children.  Three boys running,
playing at horses.  Seryozha!  And I'm losing everything and not
getting him back.  Yes, I'm losing everything, if he doesn't
return.  Perhaps he was late for the train and has come back by
now.  Longing for humiliation again!" she said to herself.  "No,
I'll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I'm unhappy, I
deserve this, I'm to blame, but still I'm unhappy, help me.
These horses, this carriage--how loathsome I am to myself in this
carriage--all his; but I won't see them again."

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and
mentally working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went
upstairs.

"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"Kitty!  Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna,
"the girl he thinks of with love.  He's sorry he didn't marry
her.  But me he thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had
anything to do with me."

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna
called.  Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had
interrupted their conversation.

"Well, so you've not gone away yet?  I meant to have come to
you," she said; "I had a letter from Stiva today."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"He writes that he can't make out quite what Alexey
Alexandrovitch wants, but he won't go away without a decisive
answer."

"I thought you had someone with you.  Can I see the letter?"

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed.  "She stayed in the
nursery.  She has been very ill."

"So I heard.  May I see the letter?"

"I'll get it directly.  But he doesn't refuse; on the contrary,
Stiva has hopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

"I haven't, and indeed I don't wish it," said Anna.

"What's this?  Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?"
thought Anna when she was alone.  "Perhaps she's right, too.  But
it's not for her, the girl who was in love with Vronsky, it's not
for her to show me that, even if it is true.  I know that in my
position I can't be received by any decent woman.  I knew that
from the first moment I sacrificed everything to him.  And this
is my reward!  Oh, how I hate him!  And what did I come here for?
I'm worse here, more miserable."  She heard from the next room
the sisters' voices in consultation.  "And what am I going to say
to Dolly now?  Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness,
submit to her patronizing?  No; and besides, Dolly wouldn't
understand.  And it would be no good my telling her.  It would
only be interesting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise
everyone and everything, how nothing matters to me now."

Dolly came in with the letter.  Anna read it and handed it back
in silence.

"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn't interest me in the
least."

"Oh, why so?  On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna.  She had never seen her in such a
strangely irritable condition.  "When are you going away?" she
asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did
not answer.

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door
and flushing red.

"Oh, what nonsense!  She's nursing, and things aren't going right
with her, and I've been advising her....  She's delighted.
She'll be here in a minute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at
lying.  "Yes, here she is."

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but
Dolly persuaded her.  Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked
up to her, blushing, and shook hands.

"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict
between her antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be
nice to her.  But as soon as she saw Anna's lovely and attractive
face, all feeling of antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet
me.  I'm used to everything.  You have been ill?  Yes, you are
changed," said Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes.  She
ascribed this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna,
who had once patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt
sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty's illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, getting up.

"Oh, when are you going?"

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile.
"I have heard so much of you from everyone, even from your
husband.  He came to see me, and I liked him exceedingly," she
said, unmistakably with malicious intent.  "Where is he?"

"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"Remember me to him, be sure you do."

"I'll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately
into her eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly."  And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with
Kitty, Anna went out hurriedly.

"She's just the same and just as charming!  She's very lovely!"
said Kitty, when she was alone with her sister.  "But there's
something piteous about her.  Awfully piteous!"

"Yes, there's something unusual about her today," said Dolly.
"When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost
crying."



Chapter 29


Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind
than when she set out from home.  To her previous tortures was
added now that sense of mortification and of being an outcast
which she had felt so distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Where to?  Home?" asked Pyotr.

"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible,
and curious!  What can he be telling the other with such warmth?"
she thought, staring at two men who walked by.  "Can one ever
tell anyone what one is feeling?  I meant to tell Dolly, and it's
a good thing I didn't tell her.  How pleased she would have been
at my misery!  She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling
would have been delight at my being punished for the happiness
she envied me for.  Kitty, she would have been even more pleased.
How I can see through her!  She knows I was more than usually
sweet to her husband.  And she's jealous and hates me.  And she
despises me.  In her eyes I'm an immoral woman.  If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me
...if I'd cared to.  And, indeed, I did care to.  There's someone
who's pleased with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat,
rubicund gentleman coming towards her.  He took her for an
acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy
head, and then perceived his mistake.  "He thought he knew me.
Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me.  I
don't know myself.  I know my appetites, as the French say.  They
want that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she
thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who
took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring face
with a towel.  "We all want what is sweet and nice.  If not
sweetmeats, then a dirty ice.  And Kitty's the same--if not
Vronsky, then Levin.  And she envies me, and hates me.  And we
all hate each other.  I Kitty, Kitty me.  Yes, that's the truth.
_'Tiutkin, coiffeur.'  Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._  I'll
tell him that when he comes," she thought and smiled.  But the
same instant she remembered that she had no one now to tell
anything amusing to.  "And there's nothing amusing, nothing
mirthful, really.  It's all hateful.  They're singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if
he were afraid of missing something.  Why these churches and this
singing and this humbug?  Simply to conceal that we all hate each
other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so
angrily.  Yashvin says, 'He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I
him of his.' Yes, that's the truth!"

She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that
she left off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew
up at the steps of her house.  It was only when she saw the
porter running out to meet her that she remembered she had sent
the note and the telegram.

"Is there an answer?" she inquired.

"I'll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into
his room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a
telegram.  "I can't come before ten o'clock.--Vronsky," she
read.

"And hasn't the messenger come back?"

"No," answered the porter.

"Then, since it's so, I know what I must do," she said, and
feeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within
her, she ran upstairs.  "I'll go to him myself.  Before going
away forever, I'll tell him all.  Never have I hated anyone as I
hate that man!" she thought.  Seeing his hat on the rack, she
shuddered with aversion.  She did not consider that his telegram
was an answer to her telegram and that he had not yet received
her note.  She pictured him to herself as talking calmly to his
mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings.
"Yes, I must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was
going.  She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings she had gone through in that awful house.  The servants,
the walls, the things in that house--all aroused repulsion and
hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he's not there,
then go there and catch him."  Anna looked at the railway
timetable in the newspapers.  An evening train went at two
minutes past eight.  "Yes, I shall be in time."  She gave orders
for the other horses to be put in the carriage, and packed in a
traveling-bag the things needed for a few days.  She knew she
would never come back here again.

Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined
that after what would happen at the station or at the countess's
house, she would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road
and stop there.

Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread
and cheese was enough to make her feel that all food was
disgusting.  She ordered the carriage and went out.  The house
threw a shadow now right across the street, but it was a bright
evening and still warm in the sunshine.  Annushka, who came down
with her things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage,
and the coachman, evidently out of humor, were all hateful to
her, and irritated her by their words and actions.

"I don't want you, Pyotr."

"But how about the ticket?"

"Well, as you like, it doesn't matter," she said crossly.

Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the
coachman to drive to the booking-office.



Chapter 30


"Here it is again!  Again I understand it all!" Anna said to
herself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly,
rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one
impression followed rapidly upon another.

"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried
to recall it.  "_'Tiutkin, coiffeur?'_--no, not that.  Yes, of what
Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one
thing that holds men together.  No, it's a useless journey you're
making," she said, mentally addressing a party in a coach and
four, evidently going for an excursion into the country.  "And
the dog you're taking with you will be no help to you.  You can't
get away from yourselves."  Turning her eyes in the direction
Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost dead
drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.  "Come,
he's found a quicker way," she thought.  "Count Vronsky and I did
not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from
it."  And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light
in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him,
which she had hitherto avoided thinking about.  "What was it he
sought in me?  Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity."
She remembered his words, the expression of his face, that
recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of their
connection.  And everything now confirmed this.  "Yes, there was
the triumph of success in him.  Of course there was love too, but
the chief element was the pride of success.  He boasted of me.
Now that's over.  There's nothing to be proud of.  Not to be
proud of, but to be ashamed of.  He has taken from me all he
could, and now I am no use to him.  He is weary of me and is
trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.  He let that
out yesterday--he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn his
ships.  He loves me, but how?  The zest is gone, as the English
say.  That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much
pleased with himself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk,
riding on a riding school horse.  "Yes, there's not the same
flavor about me for him now.  If I go away from him, at the
bottom of his heart he will be glad."

This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the
piercing light, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and
human relations.

"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is
waning and waning, and that's why we're drifting apart."  She
went on musing.  "And there's no help for it.  He is everything
for me, and I want him more and more to give himself up to me
entirely.  And he wants more and more to get away from me.  We
walked to meet each other up to the time of our love, and then we
have been irresistibly drifting in different directions.  And
there's no altering that.  He tells me I'm insanely jealous, and
I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it's not true.
I'm not jealous, but I'm unsatisfied.  But..." she opened her
lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement,
aroused by the thought that suddenly struck her.  "If I could be
anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but his
caresses; but I can't and I don't care to be anything else.  And
by that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me,
and it cannot be different.  Don't I know that he wouldn't
deceive me, that he has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that
he's not in love with Kitty, that he won't desert me!  I know all
that, but it makes it no better for me.  If without loving me,
from _duty_ he'll be good and kind to me, without what I want,
that's a thousand times worse than unkindness!  That's--hell!
And that's just how it is.  For a long while now he hasn't loved
me.  And where love ends, hate begins.  I don't know these
streets at all.  Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses
....  And in the houses always people and people....  How many of
them, no end, and all hating each other!  Come, let me try and
think what I want, to make me happy.  Well?  Suppose I am
divorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I
marry Vronsky."  Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once
pictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive
before her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in
his white hands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers,
and remembering the feeling which had existed between them, and
which was also called love, she shuddered with loathing.  "Well,
I'm divorced, and become Vronsky's wife.  Well, will Kitty cease
looking at me as she looked at me today?  No.  And will Seryozha
leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands?  And is
there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me?  Is
there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
No, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation.
"Impossible!  We are drawn apart by life, and I make his
unhappiness, and he mine, and there's no altering him or me.
Every attempt has been made, the screw has come unscrewed.  Oh, a
beggar woman with a baby.  She thinks I'm sorry for her.  Aren't
we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and so to
torture ourselves and each other?  Schoolboys coming--laughing
Seryozha?" she thought.  "I thought, too, that I loved him, and
used to be touched by my own tenderness.  But I have lived
without him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret
the exchange till that love was satisfied."  And with loathing
she thought of what she meant by that love.  And the clearness
with which she saw life now, her own and all men's, was a
pleasure to her.  "It's so with me and Pyotr, and the coachman,
Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the
Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and
always," she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched
roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.

"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.

She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only
by a great effort she understood the question.

"Yes," she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red
bag in her hand, she got out of the carriage.

Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room,
she gradually recollected all the details of her position, and
the plans between which she was hesitating.  And again at the old
sore places, hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her
tortured, fearfully throbbing heart.  As she sat on the
star-shaped sofa waiting for the train, she gazed with aversion
at the people coming and going (they were all hateful to her),
and thought how she would arrive at the station, would write him
a note, and what she would write to him, and how he was at this
moment complaining to his mother of his position, not
understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room,
and what she would say to him.  Then she thought that life might
still be happy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and
how fearfully her heart was beating.



Chapter 31


A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same
time careful of the impression they were making, hurried by.
Pyotr, too, crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with
his dull, animal face, and came up to her to take her to the
train.  Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on the
platform, and one whispered something about her to another--
something vile, no doubt.  She stepped up on the high step, and
sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that had been
white.  Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat.  With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his
hat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell;
an impudent conductor slammed the door and the latch.  A
grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed
the woman, and was appalled at her hideousness), and a little
girl laughing affectedly ran down the platform.

"Katerina Andreevna, she's got them all, _ma tante!_" cried the
girl.

"Even the child's hideous and affected," thought Anna.  To avoid
seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the
opposite window of the empty carriage.  A misshapen-looking
peasant covered with dirt, in a cap from which his tangled hair
stuck out all round, passed by that window, stooping down to the
carriage wheels.  "There's something familiar about that hideous
peasant," thought Anna.  And remembering her dream, she moved
away to the opposite door, shaking with terror.  The conductor
opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

"Do you wish to get out?"

Anna made no answer.  The conductor and her two fellow-passengers
did not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face.  She went
back to her corner and sat down.  The couple seated themselves on
the opposite side, and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized
her clothes.  Both husband and wife seemed repulsive to Anna.
The husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not
with a view to smoking but to getting into conversation with her.
Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in French something
about caring less to smoke than to talk.  They made inane and
affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.  Anna
saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other.  And no one could have helped hating such miserable
monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage,
noise, shouting and laughter.  It was so clear to Anna that there
was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter
irritated her agonizingly, and she would have liked to stop up
her ears not to hear it.  At last the third bell rang, there was
a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man
in her carriage crossed himself.  "It would be interesting to ask
him what meaning he attaches to that," thought Anna, looking
angrily at him.  She looked past the lady out of the window at
the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or
stood on the platform.  The train, jerking at regular intervals
at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a
stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving
more smoothly and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the
rails.  The window was lighted up by the bright evening sun, and
a slight breeze fluttered the curtain.  Anna forgot her fellow
passengers, and to the light swaying of the train she fell to
thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.

"Yes, what did I stop at?  That I couldn't conceive a position in
which life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be
miserable, and that we all know it, and all invent means of
deceiving each other.  And when one sees the truth, what is one
to do?"

"That's what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries
him," said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously
pleased with her phrase.

The words seemed an answer to Anna's thoughts.

"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna.  And glancing
at the red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the
sickly wife considered herself misunderstood, and the husband
deceived her and encouraged her in that idea of herself.  Anna
seemed to see all their history and all the crannies of their
souls, as it were turning a light upon them.  But there was
nothing interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.

"Yes, I'm very much worried, and that's what reason was given me
for, to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the
light when there's nothing more to look at, when it's sickening
to look at it all?  But how?  Why did the conductor run along the
footboard, why are they shrieking, those young men in that train?
why are they talking, why are they laughing?  It's all falsehood,
all lying, all humbug, all cruelty!..."

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd
of passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers,
she stood on the platform, trying to think what she had come here
for, and what she meant to do.  Everything that had seemed to her
possible before was now so difficult to consider, especially in
this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leave her alone.
One moment porters ran up to her proffering their services, then
young men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and
talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting her dodged past on
the wrong side.  Remembering that she had meant to go on further
if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked if her
coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.

"Count Vronsky?  They sent up here from the Vronskys just this
minute, to meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter.  And what is
the coachman like?"

Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red
and cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of
having so successfully performed his commission, came up to her
and gave her a letter.  She broke it open, and her heart ached
before she had read it.

"I am very sorry your note did not reach me.  I will be home at
ten," Vronsky had written carelessly....

"Yes, that's what I expected!" she said to herself with an evil
smile.

"Very good, you can go home then," she said softly, addressing
Mihail.  She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart's
beating hindered her breathing.  "No, I won't let you make me
miserable," she thought menacingly, addressing not him, not
herself, but the power that made her suffer, and she walked along
the platform.

Two maidservants walking along the platform turned their heads,
staring at her and making some remarks about her dress.  "Real,"
they said of the lace she was wearing.  The young men would not
leave her in peace.  Again they passed by, peering into her face,
and with a laugh shouting something in an unnatural voice.  The
station-master coming up asked her whether she was going by
train.  A boy selling kvas never took his eyes off her.  "My God!
where am I to go?" she thought, going farther and farther along
the platform.  At the end she stopped.  Some ladies and children,
who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused in their
loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them.
She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the edge of
the platform.  A luggage train was coming in.  The platform began
to sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.

And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the
day she had first met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do.
With a rapid, light step she went down the steps that led from
the tank to the rails and stopped quite near the approaching
train.

She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and
chains and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly
moving up, and trying to measure the middle between the front and
back wheels, and the very minute when that middle point would be
opposite her.

"There," she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the
carriage, at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers--
"there, in the very middle, and I will punish him and escape
from everyone and from myself."

She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage
as it reached her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of
her hand delayed her, and she was too late; she missed the
moment.  She had to wait for the next carriage.  A feeling such
as she had known when about to take the first plunge in bathing
came upon her, and she crossed herself.  That familiar gesture
brought back into her soul a whole series of girlish and childish
memories, and suddenly the darkness that had covered everything
for her was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an
instant with all its bright past joys.  But she did not take her
eyes from the wheels of the second carriage.  And exactly at the
moment when the space between the wheels came opposite her, she
dropped the red bag, and drawing her head back into her
shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage, and lightly, as
though she would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees.
And at the same instant she was terror-stricken at what she was
doing.  "Where am I?  What am I doing?  What for?" She tried to
get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and merciless
struck her on the head and rolled her on her back.  "Lord,
forgive me all!" she said, feeling it impossible to struggle.  A
peasant muttering something was working at the iron above her.
And the light by which she had read the book filled with
troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more brightly
than ever before, lighted up for her all that had been in
darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was quenched forever.





PART 8




Chapter 1


Almost two months had passed.  The hot summer was half over, but
Sergey Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.

Sergey Ivanovitch's life had not been uneventful during this
time.  A year ago he had finished his book, the fruit of six
years' labor, "Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of
Government in Europe and Russia."  Several sections of this book
and its introduction had appeared in periodical publications, and
other parts had been read by Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his
circle, so that the leading ideas of the work could not be
completely novel to the public.  But still Sergey Ivanovitch had
expected that on its appearance his book would be sure to make a
serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great
stir in the scientific world.

After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been
published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.

Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned
indifference answered his friends' inquiries as to how the book
was going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the
book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with
strained attention, watching for the first impression his book
would make in the world and in literature.

But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no
impression whatever could be detected.  His friends who were
specialists and savants, occasionally--unmistakably from
politeness--alluded to it.  The rest of his acquaintances, not
interested in a book on a learned subject, did not talk of it at
all.  And society generally--just now especially absorbed in
other things--was absolutely indifferent.  In the press, too, for
a whole month there was not a word about his book.

Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary
for writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still
there was silence.

Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer
Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous
allusion to Koznishev's book, suggesting that the book had been
long ago seen through by everyone, and was a subject of general
ridicule.

At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a
serious review.  Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the
article.  He had met him once at Golubtsov's.

The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold
as a writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in
personal relations.

In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with
complete respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the
article.  The article was awful.

The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book
which could not possibly be put on it.  But he had selected
quotations so adroitly that for people who had not read the book
(and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely
clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley of high-flown
phrases, not even--as suggested by marks of interrogation--used
appropriately, and that the author of the book was a person
absolutely without knowledge of the subject.  And all this was
so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have disowned
such wit himself.  But that was just what was so awful.

In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey
Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic's arguments, he
did not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes
which were ridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately
trying to recall every detail of his meeting and conversation
with the author of the article.

"Didn't I offend him in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.

And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man
about something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey
Ivanovitch found the clue to explain the article.

This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both
in the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that
his six years' task, toiled at with such love and labor, had
gone, leaving no trace.

Sergey Ivanovitch's position was still more difficult from the
fact that, since he had finished his book, he had had no more
literary work to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater
part of his time.

Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic,
and he did not know what use to make of his energy.
Conversations in drawing rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and
committees--everywhere where talk was possible--took up part of
his time.  But being used for years to town life, he did not
waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced younger
brother did, when he was in Moscow.  He had a great deal of
leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.

Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from the
failure of his book, the various public questions of the
dissenting sects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine,
of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in
public interest by the Slavonic question, which had hitherto
rather languidly interested society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had been one of the first to raise this subject, threw himself
into it heart and soul.

In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was
talked of or written about just now but the Servian War.
Everything that the idle crowd usually does to kill time was done
now for the benefit of the Slavonic States.  Balls, concerts,
dinners, matchboxes, ladies' dresses, beer, restaurants--
everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.

From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch differed on various points.  He saw that the Slavonic
question had become one of those fashionable distractions which
succeed one another in providing society with an object and an
occupation.  He saw, too, that a great many people were taking up
the subject from motives of self-interest and self-advertisement.
He recognized that the newspapers published a great deal that was
superfluous and exaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting
attention and outbidding one another.  He saw that in this
general movement those who thrust themselves most forward and
shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting
under a sense of injury--generals without armies, ministers not
in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders
without followers.  He saw that there was a great deal in it that
was frivolous and absurd.  But he saw and recognized an
unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which
it was impossible not to sympathize.  The massacre of men who
were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited
sympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the
oppressors.  And the heroism of the Servians and Montenegrins
struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longing
to help their brothers not in word but in deed.

But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey
Ivanovitch.  That was the manifestation of public opinion.  The
public had definitely expressed its desire.  The soul of the
people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, found expression.  And the
more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable it seemed to
him that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to
create an epoch.

He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great
cause, and forgot to think about his book.  His whole time now
was engrossed by it, so that he could scarcely manage to answer
all the letters and appeals addressed to him.  He worked the
whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in July that
he prepared to go away to his brother's in the country.

He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart
of the people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the
sight of that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which,
like all residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully
persuaded.  Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his
promise to stay with Levin, and so he was going with him.



Chapter 2


Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station
of the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of
people that day, when, looking round for the groom who was
following with their things, they saw a party of volunteers
driving up in four cabs.  Ladies met them with bouquets of
flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd they went into the
station.

One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the
hall and addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.

"You too come to see them off?" she asked in French.

"No, I'm going away myself, princess.  To my brother's for a
holiday.  Do you always see them off?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with
a hardly perceptible smile.

"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess.  "Is it
true that eight hundred have been sent from us already?
Malvinsky wouldn't believe me."

"More than eight hundred.  If you reckon those who have been sent
not directly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"There! That's just what I said!" exclaimed the lady.  "And it's
true too, I suppose, that more than a million has been
subscribed?"

"Yes, princess."

"What do you say to today's telegram?  Beaten the Turks again."

"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.  They were speaking
of the last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three
days in succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and
that tomorrow a decisive engagement was expected.

"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go,
and they've made some difficulty, I don't know why.  I meant to
ask you; I know him; please write a note about his case.  He's
being sent by Countess Lidia Ivanovna."

Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew
about the young man, and going into the first-class waiting-room,
wrote a note to the person on whom the granting of leave of
absence depended, and handed it to the princess.

"You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one...is going by this
train?" said the princess with a smile full of triumph and
meaning, when he found her again and gave her the letter.

"I had heard he was going, but I did not know when.  By this
train?"

"I've seen him.  He's here: there's only his mother seeing him
off.  It's the best thing, anyway, that he could do."

"Oh, yes, of course."

While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the
dining room.  They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a
glass in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers.
"In the service of religion, humanity, and our brothers," the
gentleman said, his voice growing louder and louder; "to this
great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with her blessing.
_Jivio!_" he concluded, loudly and tearfully.

Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall,
almost carrying the princess off her legs.

"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and
beaming upon them with a delighted smile.  "Capitally, warmly
said, wasn't it?  Bravo!  And Sergey Ivanovitch!  Why, you ought
to have said something--just a few words, you know, to encourage
them; you do that so well," he added with a soft, respectful, and
discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a little by the
arm.

"No, I'm just off."

"Where to?"

"To the country, to my brother's," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Then you'll see my wife.  I've written to her, but you'll see
her first.  Please tell her that they've seen me and that it's
'all right,' as the English say.  She'll understand.  Oh, and be
so good as to tell her I'm appointed secretary of the
committee....  But she'll understand!  You know, _les petites
misères de la vie humaine,_" he said, as it were apologizing to
the princess.  "And Princess Myakaya--not Liza, but Bibish--is
sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses.  Did I tell you?"

"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indifferently.

"It's a pity you're going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Tomorrow we're giving a dinner to two who're setting off--
Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha.
They're both going.  Veslovsky's only lately married.  There's a
fine fellow for you!  Eh, princess?" he turned to the lady.

The princess looked at Koznishev without replying.  But the fact
that Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid
of him did not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Smiling, he stared at the feather in the princess's hat, and then
about him as though he were going to pick something up.  Seeing a
lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up and
put in a five-rouble note.

"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I've money
in my pocket," he said.  "And how about today's telegram?  Fine
chaps those Montenegrins!"

"You don't say so!" he cried, when the princess told him that
Vronsky was going by this train.  For an instant Stepan
Arkadyevitch's face looked sad, but a minute later, when,
stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked, he went into
the hall where Vronsky was, he had completely forgotten his own
despairing sobs over his sister's corpse, and he saw in Vronsky
only a hero and an old friend.

"With all his faults one can't refuse to do him justice," said
the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch
had left them.  "What a typically Russian, Slav nature!  Only,
I'm afraid it won't be pleasant for Vronsky to see him.  Say what
you will, I'm touched by that man's fate.  Do talk to him a
little on the way," said the princess.

"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."

"I never liked him.  But this atones for a great deal.  He's not
merely going himself, he's taking a squadron at his own expense."

"Yes, so I heard."

A bell sounded.  Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here he is!" said
the princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm
walked by, wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat.
Oblonsky was walking beside him, talking eagerly of something.

Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though
he did not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

Probably on Oblonsky's pointing them out, he looked round in the
direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing,
and without speaking lifted his hat.  His face, aged and worn by
suffering, looked stony.

