

PART II

THE LITERATURE OF THE APOSTLE


CHAPTER III

PAUL AS MISSIONARY AND DEFENDER OF THE GOSPEL OF GRACE


Most vital of all passages for historical appreciation of the great
period of Paul's missionary activity and its literature is the
retrospect over his career as apostle to the Gentiles and defender of a
gospel "without the yoke of the Law" in Gal. i.-ii. Especially must the
contrast be observed between this and the very different account in Acts
ix.-xvi.

Galatians aims to counteract the encroachments of certain Judaizing
interlopers upon Paul's field, and seems to have been written from
Corinth, shortly after his arrival there (_c._ 50) on the Second
Missionary Journey (Acts xv. 36--xviii. 22). We take "the churches of
Galatia" to be those founded by Paul in company with Barnabas on the
First Missionary Journey (Acts xiii.-xiv.), and revisited with Silas
after a division of the recently evangelized territory whereby Cyprus
had been left to Barnabas and Mark (Acts xv. 36--xvi. 5; _cf._ Gal. iv.
13).

The retrospect is in two parts: (1) a proof of the divine origin of
Paul's apostleship and gospel by the independence of his conversion and
missionary career; (2) an account of his defence of his "gospel of
uncircumcision" on the two occasions when it had been threatened.
Visiting Jerusalem for the second time some fifteen years[7] after his
conversion, he secured from its "pillars," James, Peter, and John, an
unqualified, though "private," endorsement. At Antioch subsequently he
overcame renewed opposition by public exposure of the inconsistency of
Peter, who had been won over by the reactionaries.

    Footnote 7: Or perhaps thirteen. Gal. ii. 1 may reckon from the
    conversion (31-33). In both periods (Gal. i. 18, and ii. 1) both
    termini are counted.

Acts reverses Paul's point of view, making his career in the period of
unobstructed evangelization one of labour for Jews alone, in complete
dependence on the Twelve. It practically excludes the period of
opposition by a determination of the Gentile status in an 'Apostolic
Council.' Paul is represented as simply acquiescing in this decision.

As described by Paul, the whole earlier period of fifteen years had been
occupied by missionary effort for _Gentiles_, first at Damascus,
afterwards "in the regions of Syria and Cilicia." It was interrupted
only by a journey "to Arabia," and later, three years after his
conversion, by a two-weeks' private visit to Peter in Jerusalem. In this
period must fall most of the journeys and adventures of 2nd Cor. xi.
23-33. It was practically without contact with Jud√¶a. His "gospel" was
what God alone had taught him through an inward manifestation of the
risen Jesus.

As described by Luke[8] the whole period was spent in the evangelization
of Greek-speaking _Jews_, principally at Jerusalem. This was Paul's
chosen field, worked under direction of "the apostles." Only against his
will[9] was he driven for refuge to Tarsus, whence Barnabas, who had
first introduced him to the apostles, brought him to Antioch. There was
no Gentile mission until Barnabas and he were by that church made its
'apostles.' This mission was on express direction of "the Spirit" (Acts
ix. 19-30; xi. 25 f.; xiii. 1-3; _cf._ xxii. 10-21). Paul's
apostleship to the Gentiles begins, then, according to Luke, with the
First Missionary Journey, when in company with (and at first in
subordination to) Barnabas he evangelizes Cyprus and southern Galatia.
The two are agents of Antioch, with "letters of commendation" from "the
apostles and elders in Jerusalem" (Acts xv. 23-26). Paul is not an
apostle of Christ in the same sense as the Twelve (_cf._ Acts i. 21
f.). He is a providential "vessel of the Spirit," ordained "by men and
through men." His gospel is Peter's unaltered (_cf._ Acts xxvi. 16-23).

    Footnote 8: We apply the name to the writer of Luke-Acts without
    prejudice to the question of authorship.

    Footnote 9: Acts xxii. 10-21 is not quite consistent with xxvi.
    15-18; but the general sense is clear.

There is even wider disparity regarding the period of opposition. Luke
slightly postpones its beginning and very greatly antedates its
suppression. Moreover, he makes Paul accept a solution which his letters
emphatically repudiate.

According to Acts there was no opposition before the First Missionary
Journey, for the excellent reason that there had been no Gentile
propaganda.[10] There was no opposition after the Council called to
consider it (Acts xv.), for the conclusive reason that "the apostles and
elders" left nothing to dispute about. As soon as the objections were
raised the church in Antioch laid the question before these authorities,
sending Paul and Barnabas to testify. On their witness to the grace of
God among the Gentiles, Peter (explicitly claiming for himself (!) this
special apostleship, Acts xv. 7) proposes unconditional acknowledgment
of Gentile liberty, referring to the precedent of Cornelius. In this
there was general acquiescence. In fact the matter had really been
decided before (Acts xi. 1-18). The only wholly new point was that
raised by James in behalf of "the Jews among the Gentiles" (Acts xv. 21;
_cf._ xxi. 21). For their sake it is held "necessary" to limit Gentile
freedom on four points. They must abstain from three prohibited meats,
and from fornication, for these convey the "pollution of idols." The
"necessity" lies in the fact that _liberty from the Law is not conceded
to Jews_. They will be (involuntarily) defiled if they eat with their
Gentile brethren unprotected. "Fornication" is added because (in the
words of an ancient Jewish Christian) it "differs from all other sins in
that it defiles not only the sinner, but those also _who eat or
associate with him_." Paul and Barnabas, according to Luke, gladly
accepted these "decrees," and Paul distributed them "for to keep" among
his converts in Galatia (!). _Peter_ is the apostle to the Gentiles.
Antioch and Jerusalem decide the question of their status. The terms of
fellowship are those of _James_ and Peter.

    Footnote 10: Cornelius' case (Acts x.-xi. 18) is exceptional, and no
    propaganda follows. The reading "Greeks" in Acts xi. 20, though
    required by the sense and therefore adopted by the English
    translators, is not supported by the textual evidence. Luke has here
    corrected his source to suit his theory, just as in x. 1--xi. 18 he
    passes by the true significance of the story, which really deals
    with the question of _eating_ with Gentiles (xi. 3, 7 f.).

Paul has no mention of either Council or 'decrees.' His terms of
fellowship positively exclude both. He falls back upon the private
Conference, and lays bare a story of agonizing struggle to make
effective its recognition of the equality and independence of Gentile
Christianity. The struggle is a result of his resistance to emissaries
"from James" at Antioch, who had brought over all the Jewish element in
that mixed church, including Peter and "even Barnabas" to terms of
fellowship acceptable to the Pillars. After the collision at Antioch
Paul leaves the "regions of Syria and Cilicia," and transfers the scene
of his missionary efforts to the Greek world between the Taurus range
and the Adriatic. For the next ten years we see him on the one side
conducting an independent mission, proclaiming the doctrine of the Cross
as inaugurating a new era, wherein law has been done away, and Jew and
Gentile have "access in one Spirit unto the Father." On the other he is
defending this gospel of 'grace' against unscrupulous Jewish-Christian
traducers, and labouring to reconcile differences between his own
followers and those of 'the circumcision' who are not actively hostile,
but only have taken 'offence.' Throughout the period, until the arrest
in Jerusalem which ends his career as an evangelist, Paul stands alone
as champion of unrestricted Gentile liberty and equality. He cannot
admit terms of fellowship which imply a continuance of the legal
dispensation. Jewish Christians may keep circumcision and the customs if
they wish; but may not hold or recommend them as conferring the
slightest advantage in God's sight. He will not admit the doctrine of
salvation by faith _with_ works of law. Jew as well as Gentile must have
"died to the Law." There is no "justification" except "by faith _apart_
from works of law."[11]

    Footnote 11: The assertion has recently been made in very high
    quarters on the basis of 1st Cor. vii. 18 that Paul also took the
    "apostolic" view that the Christian of Jewish birth remains under
    obligation to keep the law. One would think Paul had not added verse
    19!

Unless we distinctly apprehend the deep difference, almost casually
brought out by this question of the (converted) Jew among Gentiles and
his obligation to eat with his Gentile brother, a difference between
'apostolic' Christianity as Luke gives it, and the 'gospel' of Paul, we
can have no adequate appreciation of the great Epistles produced during
this period of conflict. The basis of Luke's pleasing picture of peace
and concord is a fundamentally different conception of the relation of
Law and Grace. Paul and Luke both hold that the Mosaic commandments are
not binding on _Gentiles_. The point of difference--and Paul's own
account of his Conference with the Pillars goes to show that Luke's idea
is also theirs; else why need there be a division of 'spheres of
influence'?--is Paul's doctrine that the believing Jew _as well as the
Gentile_ is "dead to the Law." And this doctrine was never accepted
south of the Taurus range.

Agreement and union were sure to come, if only by the rapid
disappearance from the church after 70 A.D. of the element of the
circumcised, and the progressive realization in 'Syria and Cilicia' of
the impracticability of the Jerusalem-Antioch plan of requiring Gentiles
to make their tables innocuous to the legalist. If only the
participation of Paul and Barnabas be excluded from the story of Acts
xv. (or better, restored to its proper sequence after Acts xi. 30) we
have every reason to accept Luke's account of an Apostolic Council held
at Jerusalem not long after "Peter came to Antioch" to settle between
the churches of northern and southern Syria the knotty question of the
Christian Jew's eating or not eating with Gentiles. It is almost certain
that Syria did adopt this modus vivendi for "the brethren which are of
the Gentiles _in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia_" (Acts xv. 23); for we can
trace its gradual obsolescence there. In Revelation (a book of
Palestinian origin republished at Ephesus _c._ 95; _cf._ Rev. ii. 14,
20, 24) in the _Teaching of the Twelve_ (125), and in the 'Western' text
of Acts xv. (150?) there is a progressive scaling down of the 'burden.'
Gentiles are at last asked to do almost nothing more than Paul had
demanded on moral grounds without recognition of the validity of
"distinctions of meats." In A.D. 120 the 'burden' is: "Concerning meats,
keep what thou art able; however, abstain at all events from things
offered to idols, for it is the food of dead gods."

But to take Luke's account of how peace was restored, with its
implication that the Pauline gospel as developed in Greek Christendom
between the Taurus range and the Adriatic was nothing more than a branch
from the parent stock of the 'apostolic' church in "Syria and Cilicia,"
would be like viewing the history of the United States from the
standpoint of a British imperialist of a period of Anglo-Saxon reunion
in A.D. 2000, who should omit entirely the American War of Independence,
holding that Washington and Franklin after bearing testimony before
Parliament accepted for the colonies a plan of settlement prepared by a
Liberal Government which reduced to a minimum the obnoxious requirements
of the Tories.

The history of this period of the development of the independent
'gospel' of Paul and of his independent churches is so vital, and so
confused by generations of well-meaning 'harmonizers,' that we must take
time to contrast once more Luke's theory of the process of reunion with
Paul's.

_In Acts Paul takes precisely the view of Peter and James._ He is
himself 'under the Law.' He does _not_ disregard it even among Gentiles.
On the contrary, he sets an example of scrupulous legality to the Jews
among the Gentiles, himself 'walking orderly, keeping the Law.' The
statement that he "teaches them to forsake Moses, telling them not to
circumcise their children, nor to obey the customs" is a calumny (!)
which he takes public occasion to disprove (Acts xxi. 20-26). Before the
Sanhedrin he emphatically declares himself a consistent Pharisee (Acts
xxiii. 1, 6); before Felix and Festus, blameless by the standard of Law
and Prophets (xxiv. 14-16; xxv. 8); before Agrippa, a strict Pharisee in
his conduct hitherto (xxvi. 5, 22 f.). Titus, whose circumcision Paul
strenuously resisted, is never mentioned in Acts. Conversely Timothy (a
Jew only on his mother's side) Paul "took and circumcised" immediately
after the Jerusalem Council "because of the Jews that were in those
parts" (Galatia!). His visit with Barnabas to Jerusalem is not
occasioned by opposition to Gentile missions, though it falls between
Barnabas' mission from Jerusalem to investigate the alarming reports of
Gentile conversions at Antioch, and the First Missionary Journey on
which the two take with them Mark, who had accompanied them from
Jerusalem. No; according to Luke Gentile missions did not yet
exist[12](!). This visit (that of the Conference, Gal. ii. 1-10) was
merely to convey a gift from the Antioch church to that of Jerusalem
because of the famine "about that time" (it occurred in 46-47).
Conversely the great 'offering of the Gentiles' made at the risk of
Paul's life in company with delegates from each province of his field,
as a proffer of peace, the enterprise which occupies so large a place in
his effort and his letters of this period (1st Cor. xvi. 1-6; 2nd Cor.
8-9; Rom. xv. 15, 16, 25-32), has in Acts no relation to the
controversy--for the demonstration of Paul's exemplary legalism in the
temple is merely incidental. The gift Paul brought was "alms to my
nation" (!) (Acts xxiv. 17). The reader asks in vain what necessitates
this dangerous journey. The only motives assigned are a Nazarite vow
assumed in Cenchre√¶ (xviii. 18; xxi. 24), and regard for the Jewish
feasts (xx. 16).

    Footnote 12: On the reading "Greeks" in Acts xi. 20 see Footnote 10
    above., p. 59.

The background of history against which the modern reader must place the
great letters of Paul of the first period, is manifestly something quite
different from the mere unsifted story of Acts. Their real origin is in
a profound difference in Paul's idea of 'the gospel' and the necessity
of defending the independence of it and of the Gentile churches founded
on it. The difference originates in Paul's own religious experience. It
found its first expression in his antithesis of Law and Grace, his
doctrine that the cross marks the abolition of the economy of Law.

Both in Galatians and everywhere else Paul treats on equal terms with
the representatives of the "apostleship of the circumcision." He
denounces Peter and "the rest of the Jews," including "even Barnabas,"
at Antioch, after they have withdrawn from Gentile fellowship in order
to preserve their legal 'cleanness,' and the point of the denunciation
is that this is inconsistent with _their_ (implied) abandonment of the
Law as a means of salvation when they "sought to be justified by faith
in Christ." This makes their conduct not only inconsistent but cowardly
and "hypocritical."

Here is something far deeper than a mere question of policy. Paul's
attitude shows that from the beginning he has really been preaching "a
different gospel." A gospel _about_ Christ in which the central fact is
the cross as the token of the abolition of a dispensation of Law wherein
Jew and Gentile alike were in a servile relation to God, under angelic
(or demonic) "stewards and governors," and the inauguration of a
dispensation of Grace, wherein all who have 'faith' and receive in
baptism the gift of 'the Spirit,' are thereby adopted to be God's sons.
Beside this cosmic drama of the cross and resurrection wherein God
reveals his redemptive purpose for the world, the mere inculcation of
the easy yoke of Jesus as a new Law, simplifying and supplementing the
old by restoring the doctrine of forgiveness for the repentant believer
(_cf._ Matt. xxviii. 20; Acts x. 42 f.; xiii. 39; xxvi. 22 f.) seems
only half a gospel.

Paul can never surrender the independence of his God-given message, nor
the liberty wherewith Christ has made all believers free in abolishing
the economy of law and making them "sons" by the Spirit. And yet he is
even more determined to achieve peace and reunion than the apostles 'of
the circumcision'; only he has a different plan. Paul and his churches
fall back upon the Jerusalem Conference, not upon the 'Apostolic
Council.' The Conference is their Magna Carta. Its recognition of
Paul's independent gospel and apostleship as no less divine than Peter's
is their guarantee of liberty and equality; its request for brotherly
aid is their promise of fraternity.

Approaches were made on both sides. It is true the ill-advised attempt
of the Judaizers to secure unity by a renewal of their propaganda of the
Law, seducing the Greek churches from their loyalty to Paul and his
gospel, provoked from him only such thunderbolts as Galatians, with its
defence of "the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free," or 2nd Cor.
x. 1 to xiii. 10, with its denunciation of the "ministers of Satan."
Peace through surrender was not to Paul's mind. But the sincere attempt
of the followers of Peter to find a _modus vivendi_, even if they did
not venture to claim liberty from the Law for themselves, found Paul
prepared to go more than half-way. His epistles are not more remarkable
for their strenuous defence of the liberty of Son ship, than for their
insistence on the obligation of brotherly love. His churches must be not
only morally pure for their own sakes, but must avoid offences to the
more scrupulous. Even that which Christian liberty allows must be
sacrificed to the scruples of the 'weak,' if only it be not "unto
doubtful disputations," or demanded as of right. From 1st Thessalonians
(Corinth, A.D. 50), where, in the absence of all Judaizing opposition
Paul merely exhibits his simple gospel of the resurrection and judgment
to come, unaffected by questions of Law and Grace, on through Galatians
with its sublime polemic for the liberty of sons, to the Corinthian
correspondence, with its insistence on the duty of consideration and
forbearance, its stronger note of love, its revelation of the
widespread, strenuous exertions of Paul to promote his great 'offering,'
down to Romans, where the 'offering of the Gentiles' is ready to be made
(Rom. xv. 16-33), and Paul is sedulously preparing to enter a great new
field already partially occupied, by presenting a full and superlatively
conciliatory statement of his entire 'gospel' (i. 15-17), there is
steady progress toward the "peace" and "acceptance" which he hopes to
find in Jerusalem. The later Epistles, with their different phase of
conflict, the very attitude of 'apostolic' Christianity toward Paul, as
exhibited in Acts, make it incredible that substantial unity was not in
fact secured.[13] We cannot, indeed, accept Luke's representation of
Paul as performing the Nazarite ceremonial in the temple in order to
prove _that he does not teach that the Law is not binding on Jews_. But
it does not follow that Paul may not have done even this to prove that
his principle of accommodation to the weak (1st Cor. ix. 19-22) left
ample room for fellowship with the Jewish Christian--except when (as
with Peter and Barnabas at Antioch) the needless scruples of the
legalist were made a pretext for "compelling the Gentiles to live as do
the Jews."

    Footnote 13: The actual outcome is seen in the reduction of the
    'burden' to the two items of abstinence from "fornication and from
    things offered to idols." Paul's nicer distinctions under the latter
    head (1st Cor. viii. 1-13, x. 14-23) as well as his distinction
    between the ceremonial and the moral grounds for abstinence, were
    disregarded.

Had unity been attained through the simple process imagined by Luke,
obedient acquiescence of Paul and the Gentiles in the divinely inspired
verdict of "the apostles and elders in Jerusalem," Christianity would
have been an immeasurably poorer thing than it became. Indeed, it is
questionable whether a gospel of mere simplification, extension and
supplementation of the Law would ever have made permanent conquest of
the Gentile world. It is because Paul stood out on this question of
'meats' for the equal right of his independent gospel, refusing
submission until his great ten-years' work of evangelization by tongue
and pen had made Gentile Christianity a factor of at least equal
importance with Jewish, that our religion was enriched by its
Hellenistic strain. The deeper insight into the real significance of
Jesus' work and fate born of Paul's peculiar experience and his
Hellenistic apprehension of the gospel found embodiment in the
beginnings of a New Testament literature. The writings of this period
must accordingly be viewed against the background of a critical history.
Luke's account, written in the interest of "apostolic" authority, must
receive such modifications as the contemporary documents require.

Taking up the story at the point of divergence we see Paul and Barnabas
returning to Antioch after the Conference with the Pillars, glad at
heart, and expecting now to resume the work for Gentiles without
impediment. Besides Titus, John Mark of Jerusalem, a nephew of Barnabas,
accompanied them. The Missionary Journey to Cyprus and (southern)
Galatia follows, Mark returning, however, to Jerusalem after leaving
Cyprus.

It was probably during the absence of the missionaries that "Peter came
to Antioch" and, at first, followed the Pauline practice of disregarding
'distinctions of meats.' Later, on arrival of certain "from James" he
"drew back and separated himself, fearing those of the circumcision."
While matters were at this stage Paul and Barnabas reappeared on the
scene. Paul thought it necessary to rebuke Peter "openly, before them
all." Barnabas, former head of the Antioch church, took sides with Peter
and "the rest of the Jews," doubtless determining the attitude of the
church; for Paul says nothing of prevailing upon them by his argument,
but merely turns it at once upon the Galatians themselves. Moreover,
Barnabas now takes Cyprus as his mission field, with Mark as his helper,
while Paul with a new companion, Silvanus (in Acts "Silas," a bearer of
the 'decrees' from Jerusalem), takes the northern half of the newly
evangelized territory, and through much difficulty and opposition makes
his way to the coasts of the √Ügean.

This second visit to the churches of Galatia (Acts xvi. 1-5) was
signalized by warnings against the (possible) preaching of "another
gospel" (Gal. i. 9); for Paul had reason to anticipate trouble from the
"false brethren." If Acts may be believed, it was also marked by an
extraordinary evidence of Paul's readiness to "become all things to all
men" in the interest of conciliation. He is said to have circumcised a
Galatian half-Jew named Timothy. If so, it was certainly not to prove
his respect for the legal requirement, but rather its indifference.
"Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision nothing; only faith working
through love." But these generous 'accommodations' of Paul produced more
of misrepresentation than of conciliation. He had cause to regret his
liberality later (Gal. i. 10; v. 11 f.; _cf._ 1st Cor. vii. 18).

Some unexplained obstacle (Acts xvi. 6) prevented Paul's entrance into
the Province of Asia at this time. Ephesus, his probable objective, had
perhaps already been occupied (xviii. 24-28). He turned north through
Phrygia-Galatia, hoping to find a field in Bithynia, but was again
disappointed. At Troas, the very extremity of Asia, came the
turning-point in the fortunes of the missionaries. Encouraged by a
vision they crossed into Macedonia and found fields white for the
harvest.

The Epistles to Thessalonica address one of these Macedonian churches
from Corinth, whither the missionaries have been driven. Timothy had
been sent back from Athens when Paul's own repeated attempts to return
had been frustrated, and has just arrived with good news of the church's
perseverance in spite of a persecution stirred up by the Jews. It is
against these, apparently, not against Jewish-Christian detractors, that
Paul defends his character and message (1st Thess. ii. 1-13). There is
also an urgent warning against fornication (iv. 1-8) and exhortation to
abound in love (iv. 9-12), with correction of the natural Greek tendency
to misapprehend the Jewish eschatology and resurrection-doctrine (iv.
13--v. 1-11; _cf._ 1st Cor. xv.). The closing admonitions relate to the
direction of church meetings and discipline.

2nd Thessalonians corrects and supplements the eschatology of 1st
Thessalonians by adding a doctrine of Antichrist, which is at all events
thoroughly Jewish and earlier than 70, when the temple was destroyed in
which it expects the manifestation of "the man of sin." It is the only
one of the Epistles of this period whose authenticity is seriously
questioned by critical scholarship. How little this affects the question
of Paul's 'gospel' may be seen by the fact that the entire contents
cover less than 3 per cent. of the earlier Epistles, while the subject
is a mere detail.

Far more significant is it to observe the close correspondence between
the missionary preaching of Paul as here described by himself (1st
Thess. i. 9 f.) and the general apostolic message (_kerygma_) as
described by Luke (Acts x. 42 f.; xiv. 15-17; xvii. 24-31). Where
there are no Judaizers there is no reference to the dispensations of Law
and Grace and the abolition of the former in the Cross. The doctrine is
the common gospel of the Resurrection, wherein Jesus has been manifested
as the Messiah. Faith in him secures forgiveness to the repentant; all
others are doomed to perish in the judgment shown by his 'manifestation'
to be at hand (_cf._ 1st Cor. xv. 11; Rom. i. 3-5).

Galatians was written but slightly before (or after?) the letters to
Thessalonica. Its single theme (after the retrospect) is the Adoption to
Son ship through the Spirit. Against the Judaizer's plea that to share
in the Inheritance one must be adopted (preferably by circumcision) into
the family of Abraham, or at all events pay respect to the Mosaic Law,
Paul asserts the single fact of the adoption of the Spirit. "It is
because ye are sons that God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts crying (in the ecstatic utterances of 'tongues') Abba, that is,
Father" (Gal. iv. 6). To go back to legal observances is to revert from
redemption to bondage. All Christians are indeed sons of Abraham, but
only as sharers of his trust in God. Abraham was made "heir of the
world" (Rom. iv. 13) for his faith. Circumcision and the Law came
afterwards. They were not superimposed stipulations and conditions of
the promise. On the contrary they were temporary pedagogic measures
intended to produce the consciousness of sin and (moral) death, so that
when the Heir should come men should be ready to cast themselves on the
mercy of God displayed in his vicarious death.[14] Thus the messianic
Redemption is a redemption from a system issuing in sin and death. On
the cross even the sinless Christ incurred the curse in order that
believers thus redeemed might have the Blessing of the Abrahamic promise
(Gal. iii. 1--iv. 7).

    Footnote 14: Romans enlarges the conception of the economy of Law by
    making it include the Gentile law of 'conscience' (Rom. i. 18--ii.
    16). In Galatians this point is covered only by classing the
    "angels" through whom the Mosaic Law was given, with the "Elements"
    honoured in Gentile religion. Both are codes of "stewards and
    governors."

But this transfer from bondage to liberty, from the legal to the filial
relation, does not "make Christ a minister of sin." On the contrary, if
the delivering Spirit of Son ship has been received at all, it controls
the life for purity and love. One cannot be a son and be unfilial or
unbrotherly. The unity of the redeemed world in Christ is the unity of
loving service, not of subjection to a bygone system of rules (iv.
8--vi. 18). Thus does Galatians meet the insidious plea of the
Judaizers, and their charges against Pauline liberty.

The church founded by Paul in Corinth (Acts xviii. 1-17) was grounded
from the beginning in this doctrine of the Cross. Paul purposely
restricted himself to it (1st Cor. i. 17-25; ii. 1-5). He had indeed a
world-view, of which we learn more in the Epistles of the Captivity, a
philosophy revealed by the Spirit as a "mystery of God." Those who
afterwards in Corinth came to call themselves followers "of Apollos" had
nothing to teach him on this score. But consideration of this Grecizing
tendency, too often issuing in a mere "philosophy and vain deceit after
the Elements of the world and not after Christ" (Col. ii. 8), must be
deferred, in favour of questions which became more immediately pressing.
For after Paul had left Corinth to make a brief visit via Ephesus to
C√¶sarea and Antioch, and had returned through the now pacified Galatian
churches to make Ephesus his permanent headquarters (Acts xviii. 18-23),
he received disturbing news of conditions in Corinth. Under Apollos (now
at Ephesus with Paul) an Alexandrian convert thoroughly indoctrinated
with Paul's gospel (Acts xviii. 24-28) the church had flourished, but
discussions had subsequently arisen, resulting in a letter to Paul
asking his advice on disputed points. Besides this there were moral
blemishes. First the factious strife itself, of which Paul has learnt
from newcomers from Corinth; secondly a case of unpunished incest. A
previous letter from Paul (now lost, or but partially preserved in 2nd
Cor. vi. 14--vii. 1) had required the church "to have no company with
fornicators." The church, making the application general, had pleaded
the impracticability of "going out of the world." Paul now explains: "If
any man _that is named a brother_ be a fornicator ... with such a one
no, not to eat." After further rebuke for litigiousness, and a lack of
moral tone, especially in the matter of "fornication" (ch. vi.), Paul
takes up seriatim "the things whereof ye wrote." We are chiefly
interested in the long section (viii. 1--xi. 1) on "things offered to
idols" wherein Paul instructs those who would be imitators of his
freedom, but who forget that he has always refused to assert his rights
when thereby the 'weak' were stumbled. Moreover fornication is never
among the permissible things, nor even the eating of meats offered to
idols _at the heathen banquet itself_. Such food is unobjectionable only
when it has been sold in the market, and can be eaten without 'offence.'

The other questions related to church meetings for the "Lord's supper"
and the exercise of "spiritual gifts." They give opportunity for the
development of Paul's noble doctrine of unity through loving service
(xi. 2--xiv. 40). The doctrinal section of 1st Corinthians concludes
with a full statement of Paul's doctrine of the resurrection body
(called forth by Greek objections to the Jewish). From the items of
business at the close we learn that "the collection for the saints" has
been under way some time already "in Galatia," and that Paul hopes,
after passing through Macedonia, to join the delegation which is to
carry the money to Jerusalem (xvi. 1-6).

As it turned out Paul actually followed the itinerary outlined in 1st
Cor. xvi. 1-6, but not until after distressing experiences. Timothy,
sent (by way of Macedonia, Acts xix. 22) as Paul's representative (iv.
17; xvi. 10 f.), was unable to restore order. The opposition to Paul's
apostolic authority, treated almost contemptuously in ix. 1-14, grew to
alarming proportions. Paul received so direct and personal an affront
(either on a hasty visit undertaken in person from Ephesus, or in the
person of Timothy) that he despatched a peremptory ultimatum, whose
effect he is anxiously waiting to hear when 2nd Corinthians opens with
Paul driven out from Ephesus, a refugee in Macedonia (_c._ 55). It is
highly probable that the disconnected section appended between 2nd Cor.
ix. 15 and the Farewell, is taken from this "grievous" letter written
"out of much affliction and anguish of heart with many tears" (2nd Cor.
ii. 1-4; vii. 8-16); for it was not only a peremptory demand for
punishment of the offender, but also a letter of forced
self-commendation. Paul cannot have written in self-commendation on more
than one occasion, and he promises not to repeat this in iii. 1 ff. We
may take 2nd Cor. x.-xiii., then, as representing the "grievous" letter.
The opposition emanates from Judaizers who say they are "of Christ," and
may therefore be identical with those of 1st Cor. i. 12. But it has
grown to proportions which for a time made Paul despair of the church's
loyalty. Titus' arrival in Macedonia with news of their restored
obedience had been an inexpressible relief (ii. 5-17; vii. 8-16). It
remains only to set his 'ministry of the new covenant' once more in
contrast with the Mosaic 'ministry of condemnation and death,' including
further elucidation of the doctrine of the resurrection body (iii.
1--vi. 10) and to urge generosity in the matter of the collection (chh.
viii.-ix.).

The somewhat disordered, but unmistakably genuine material of 2nd
Corinthians was probably given out as a kind of residuum of Pauline
material long after our 1st Corinthians had been put in circulation,
perhaps when renewed strife had caused the church in Rome to intervene
through Clement (95), who quotes 1st Corinthians, but shows no knowledge
of 2nd Corinthians. The correspondence is not only invaluable to the
church for its p√¶an of love as the invincible, abiding gift of the
Spirit (1st Cor. xiii.) and its sublime eulogy of the "ministry of the
new covenant," but instructive in the highest degree to the historian.
Almost every aspect of Paul's work as missionary, defender of his own
independent apostleship and gospel, guide and instructor of developing
Gentile-Christian thought, and ardent commissioner for peace with the
apostolic community in Syria, is here set forth. The best exposition of
the history is the documentary material itself, and conversely.

Romans was written during the peaceful winter at Corinth (55-56) which
followed these weeks of tormenting anxiety in Macedonia (Acts xx. 1-3).
Paul feels that he has carried the gospel to the very shores of the
Adriatic (xv. 19). He is on the point of going to Jerusalem with his
great 'offering of the Gentiles,' and has already fixed his eye on Rome
and "Spain"! Just as before the First Missionary Journey he forestalled
opposition by frankly laying his gospel before the Pillars, so now he
lays it before the church in Rome, but most delicately and tactfully,
not as though assuming to admonish Christians already "filled with all
knowledge and able to admonish one another" (xv. 14), but "that I with
you may be comforted in you, each of us by the other's faith" (i. 12).
Thus the Epistle is an eirenicon. For Rome was even more than Ephesus
had been, a preoccupied territory, though a metropolis of Paul's
mission-field. Most of the church are Paul's sympathizers, but there
are many of the 'weak,' who may easily be 'offended.' The letter repeats
and enlarges the argument of Galatians for the gospel of Grace, carrying
back the promise to Abraham to its antecedent in the fall of Adam,
whereby all mankind had passed under the domination of Sin and Death.
The function of the Law is again made clear as bringing men to
consciousness of this bondage, till it is done away by (mystical) death
and resurrection with Christ. In the adoption wrought by the Spirit the
whole creation even, groaning since Adam's time under 'vanity,' is
liberated in the manifestation of the sons of God. Jesus, glorified at
the right hand of God, is the firstfruits of the cosmic redemption (Rom.
i.-viii.). Such is Paul's theory of 'evolution.' It is followed by a
vindication of God in history. Rom. ix.-xi. exhibits the relation of Jew
and Gentile in the process of the redemption. Israel has for the time
being been hardened that the Gentiles may be brought in. Ultimately
their very jealousy at this result will bring them also to repentant
faith.

Paul's sublime exposition of his view of cosmic and historic redemption
is followed (as in all the Epistles) by a practical exhortation (chh.
xii.-xiv.), the keynote of which is unity through mutual forbearance and
loving service. It repeats the Corinthian figure of the members in the
body, and the Galatian definition of the 'law of Christ.' Special
application is made to the case of the scrupulous who make distinctions
of days and of meats. Here, however (xiv. 1--xv. 13), there is no longer
need to resist a threatened yoke. Only tenderness and consideration are
urged for the over-scrupulous "brother in Christ." It was in this spirit
that Paul and his great company of delegates from the churches of the
Gentiles went up to Jerusalem (Acts xx. 4--xxi. 17).




CHAPTER IV

PAUL AS PRISONER AND CHURCH FATHER


The second period of Paul's literary career begins after an interval of
several years. This interval is covered indeed, so far as the great
events of the Apostle's personal story are concerned, by the last nine
chapters of Acts, but exceedingly obscure as respects the fortunes of
his mission-field and the occasion for the group of Epistles which come
to us after its close. It is barely possible that a fragment or two from
the so-called Pastoral Epistles (1st Timothy, 2nd Timothy, Titus), which
seem to be compiled long after Paul's death on the basis of some
remnants of his correspondence, may have been written shortly after the
arrest in Jerusalem and "first defence." In 2nd Tim. iv. 11-18 a journey
is referred to from Troas by way of Ephesus which coincides in many
respects with that of Acts xx. If the fragment could be taken out from
its present setting it might be possible to identify the two; for it is
clear from the forecast of Acts xx. 25, 38 that Paul never did revisit
this region. The grip of Rome upon her troublesome prisoner was not
relaxed until his martyrdom, probably some considerable time before the
"great multitude" whom Nero condemned after the conflagration of 64.
However, until analysis can dissect out with greater definiteness the
genuine elements of the Pastoral Epistles, they cannot be used to throw
light upon the later period of Paul's career. A historical background
has indeed been created to meet their requirements--a release of Paul,
resumption of missionary activities on the coasts of the √Ügean, renewed
imprisonment in Rome and ultimate martyrdom. But this has absolutely no
warrant outside the Pastorals themselves, and is both inconsistent with
Acts and open to criticism intrinsically. The story thus created of a
release, _second_ visitation of the Greek churches, and _second_
imprisonment must, therefore, be regarded as fictitious, and the
Pastoral Epistles in their present form as products of the post-Pauline
age.

It is our task to trace the development among the Greek churches of
Christianity conceived as a "revelation of God in Christ," alongside of
its development in the 'apostolic' church, until the period of
'catholic' unity and the completed canon. Upon this development the
story of Paul's personal fortunes in Acts throws but little light. We
merely see that his great peace-making visit to Jerusalem was suddenly
interrupted by his arrest in the temple, while engaged in an act of
worship undoubtedly intended by him to demonstrate his willingness in
the interest of unity to "become as under the Law to them that are under
the Law." After this his great delegation from the Gentile churches must
have scattered to their homes. Paul remained a prisoner for two years in
C√¶sarea, and after an adventurous journey covering the ensuing autumn
and winter (59-60), spent two more years in less rigid confinement at
Rome. We need no hint from his request in 2nd Tim. iv. 13 for "books and
parchments" to infer that the years of forced seclusion in C√¶sarea were
marked by study and meditation; but narrative and inference together
convey but little of what we mainly desire to know: the course of
religious development in the Pauline churches, as a background for the
literature.

On the other hand recent research into religious conditions in the early
Empire has removed the principal objections to the authenticity of
Philippians, Philemon, Colossians, and even Ephesians. We are far from
being compelled to come down to the time of the great Gnostic systems of
the second century to find a historical situation appropriate to this
group of letters purporting to be written by Paul from his captivity.
Indeed they exhibit on any theory of their origin a characteristic and
legitimate development of the Pauline gospel of Son ship by the Spirit
of Adoption abolishing the dispensation of Law. It is a development
almost inevitable in a conception of 'the gospel' formed on Greek ideas
of Redemption, if we place in opposition to it a certain baser type of
superstitious, mongrel Judaism, revealed in the Epistles themselves,
repeatedly referred to in Acts, and now known to us by a mass of
extraneous documentary material.

The new disturbers of the churches' peace revealed in the Epistles of
the Captivity are still of Jewish origin and tendency; but at least in
the region of Coloss√¶ (in the Lycus Valley, adjacent to southern
Galatia) the issue is no longer that between Law and Grace, but concerns
the nature and extent of the Redemption. The trouble still comes from a
superstitious exaltation of the Mosaic revelation; but those whom Paul
here opposes do not "use the Law lawfully," frankly insisting on its
permanent obligation as the will of God for all sons, unaffected by the
Cross. It is now admitted to be an "ordinance of angels"; but the
observance of it is inculcated because man's redemption can only come
through conciliation of these higher beings. Mystical union with
superhuman Powers is to be promoted by its observances. This
superstition is neither purely Jewish, nor purely Greek. It is
composite--Hellenistic. Judaism is imitated in the superstitious
reverence for the Law; but the conception of Redemption leaves behind
every thought of national particularism and is openly individualistic.
The redemption sought is that of the individual soul from the
limitations of humanity, and doubtless the name of Jesus played an
important r√¥le in the emancipation, as in the exorcisms of the sons of
Sceva (Acts xix. 13 f.); only it was not "above every name."

But even Jewish apocalypses such as _Enoch_ and _Baruch_ with all their
superstitious angelology and demonology manage somehow to cling to the
ancient Jewish faith in the primacy of man, and Paul in like manner
upholds against the theosophists the doctrine of the believer's Son ship
and joint-heirship with Christ. In fact the Adoption, Redemption and
Inheritance accorded in the gift of the Spirit are to his mind gifts so
great and exalted as to make it a "gratuitous self-humiliation" to pay
homage, in Mosaic or other ceremonial, to "angels," "principalities," or
"powers." In Christ we already have a foothold in the heavenly regions.
We were foreordained in his person to be "heirs" "before the foundation
of the world." His resurrection and ascension "to the right hand of God"
participated in by us through "the Spirit" was a "triumph" over the
'Elements' and 'Rulers.' They should be beneath the Christian's feet in
feeling, as they soon will be in reality.

This exalted doctrine of Christ's Son ship as compared with the mere
temporary authority of "angels and principalities and powers," secures
to the Epistles of the Captivity their well-deserved title of
"Christological"; for they lay the foundation for all later doctrines of
the Logos or Word. It is well to realize, however, that the doctrine is
in origin and meaning simply a vindication of the divine dignity of
manhood.

An idea of outward conditions at the time of writing may be gained from
the two Epistles of the group most universally admitted to be genuine,
Philemon and Philippians. Both are written from captivity, almost
certainly in Rome, because the writer is expecting, if released, to
revisit the √Ügean coasts, which was not Paul's expectation in C√¶sarea.
But there is a wide difference between the two as respects the
circumstances presupposed. The tone of Philemon is hopeful, sprightly,
even jocose. Paul is in company with a group of "fellow-workers" which
significantly includes "Mark," as well as two companions of the voyage
to Rome, "Aristarchus" of Thessalonica, and "Luke" (Acts xxvii. 2).
Epaphras, his "fellow-prisoner," appears in Colossians as the founder of
that church and a teacher in the adjacent towns of Hierapolis and
Laodicea. He has brought to Paul either of his own knowledge or by
report from others, disturbing news of the inroads of the heresy.
Onesimus, whose case occasions the letter to Philemon, is an escaped
slave of this friend and convert of Paul. The apostle is sending back
the slave with the request that he be forgiven and manumitted. The
interrelation of the persons mentioned in Philemon and Colossians shows
that the occasion is the same. Tychicus (_cf._ Acts xx. 3) the bearer of
Colossians (Col. iv. 7) accompanies Onesimus. Ephesians (if authentic)
belongs to the same group, being also carried by Tychicus (Eph. vi. 21).
It was certainly _not_ intended for Ephesus, but for some church or
churches not directly known to Paul (i. 15; iii. 2). It bears much the
same relation to Colossians as Romans to Galatians. In spite of copious
evidences of its use reaching back even to Clement of Rome (95) the
genuineness of Ephesians is more seriously questioned than that of any
other Pauline letter save the Pastorals. In the present writer's
judgment this suspicion is unfounded, but the question of Pauline,
semi-Pauline or deutero-Pauline is immaterial to the general
development.

Philippians is of later date than Philemon and its companions. Paul has
been in circumstances of dire physical distress, and is comforting his
correspondents in view of an immediately impending decision of his case
(ii. 23). The issue will be life or death, and Paul has no earthly (but
only super-earthly) reasons for hoping the verdict may not be adverse.
He is still expecting, if released, to revisit the √Ügean coast (ii. 24);
but it is only smiling through his tears when he tells the Philippians
that their need of him is so great that he is confident he will be
spared to them (Phil. 1. 12-30). Knowing that this journey was never
made, we can but infer that the fate so near at hand in Phil. ii. 17
came actually to pass. Paul's blood was "poured out a libation," as
tradition of extreme antiquity credibly reports, and it can hardly have
been after a release, return to Greece and second arrest. The passage in
2nd Tim iv. 5-8 which repeats the figure of the libation (Phil. ii. 17),
treating it no longer as doubtful, but a tragic certainty, will have
been penned (if authentic) but a few weeks at most after Philippians,
and immediately before the end. If Philemon-Colossians-Ephesians be
dated in 62, Philippians, with the possible fragments in 2nd Timothy,
may be dated a few months later.

Conditions at Philippi appear only in a favourable light from this
latest authentic epistle. Paul can thank God upon every remembrance of
these loyal and liberal Macedonian friends. In Rome, however, he is
still affected by Judaizing opposition, though his attitude toward it
(in Rome at least) shows the significant difference from Galatians that
he can now be thankful that Christ is preached even thus (Phil. i.
15-18). Moreover there is a difference in the type of legalism
represented; for while in his warning to the Philippians of the possible
coming of the heretics Paul is moved to recall his own renunciation of
legalistic righteousness, the terms of opprobrium applied to the
disturbers imply an immorality and assimilation to heathenism (Phil.
iii. 2 19; _cf._ Rom. xvi. 17-20) which could not justly be said to
characterize the legalism of the synagogue.

The doctrinal elements of Philippians consist of two passages: (1) the
denunciation of the "concision" (a term applied to the heathenized
renegade Jew) ending with a reminder of the high enthronement of our
spiritual Redeemer (iii. 1-21); (2) the definition of the "mind," or
"disposition," of Christ exhibited in his self-abnegating incarnation,
obedient suffering, and supreme exaltation (ii. 5-11). Both passages are
characteristic of Paul's gospel in general, which is always, as against
that of the Judaizers, the gospel of a drama, or spectacle, witnessed;
not a gospel of teachings heard. It is a gospel _about_ Jesus, not of
precepts inculcated _by_ Jesus, a drama of redemption for all mankind
out of servitude into Son ship, wherein the cross is central. Both
passages are also characteristic, as we shall see, of the later period
of Paul's literary activity; for even in Philippians, the dominant
doctrinal motive is the Redemption to which Paul is looking forward, and
this is now conceived even more strongly than in the earlier letters in
terms of personal religion. He anticipates "departing to be with Christ"
(i. 23) rather than awaiting Him on earth (1st Thess. iv. 17). The
"goal" toward which the Christian "presses on" is personal immortality
through mystic union with Christ in the life of God (iii. 10-14). This
too is a real doctrine of the Kingdom of God; but its starting-point is
humanity's triumph over its enemies 'sin' and 'death,' not Israel's
triumph over its oppressors. Still more in the Colossian group does it
become apparent how the 'far-off, divine event' is a unity of mankind
through the Spirit corresponding to the Stoic figure of the members and
the body rather than the 'Kingdom of David.'

Again the opponents in Phil. iii. 2, 18 f. are not mere Pharisaic
legalists, unable to see that Law and Grace are mutually exclusive
systems, and nullifying the significance of the Cross by perpetuating
the system it was intended to abolish. If we may explain the difference
by Colossians, they are Jews of heathenish tendencies, pretended
adherents of the gospel, who nullify its significance by perpetuating
regard for the Law; only the servility deplored is not servility toward
God, but toward "angels" (Col. ii. 18).

To appreciate the enlargement which has come to Christianity beyond its
merely 'apostolic' form through the independent development of the Greek
churches in this second period we must realize that Paul's 'gospel of
the uncircumcision' differed in respect to promise as well as law. The
coming Kingdom which he preached was something more than "the kingdom of
our father David" extended from Jerusalem. What it really was becomes
fully apparent only in the 'Christological Epistles.' But we must study
the opposition to appreciate how differently the idea of Redemption had
developed on Greek soil.

That aspect of Judaism which was most conspicuous to the outsider in
Paul's day was not the legalism of the scribes and the Palestinian
synagogue, perpetually embalmed in the Talmud and orthodox rabbinism of
to-day. It was the superstition and magic which excite the contempt of
satirists like Horace, Juvenal, and Martial, and call forth descriptions
like that of the letter of Hadrian to Servianus, characterizing the
Samaritans, Jews _and Christians_ dwelling in Egypt as "all astrologers,
haruspices, and quacksalvers." It is this type of Jew who is most widely
known in the contemporary Hellenistic world; whose spells and
incantations, framed in Old Testament language, are perpetuated in the
leaden incantation rolls and magic papyri of the Berlin collection;
whose portrait is painted in the Simon Magus of Acts viii. 14-24, the
Elymas the sorcerer of Acts xiii. 6-12, the "strolling Jews, exorcists,"
and the "seven sons of Sceva" of Acts xix. 13-20. A Christian writer
early in the second century is so impressed with this characteristic of
contemporary Judaism that he even distinguishes as the third type of
religion, besides idolatry and Christianity, "the Jews, who fancy that
they alone know God, but do not, worshipping angels and archangels, the
moon and the month," and seeks to prove his case by citing the Old
Testament festal system. Indeed this idea of Judaism is the predominant
one among the second-century apologists. Jewish "superstition" is a
notorious fact of the time. The transcendentalizing of Jewish theology
after the Persian period had led inevitably to an elaborate angelology
and demonology. When as part of this process a more and more
supernatural character was attributed to the Law it could but have a
two-fold effect. The learned and orthodox would treat it soberly as a
revelation of the divine will. This is the legalistic development we see
in the Talmud and the Palestinian synagogue. The ignorant and
superstitious, especially in the Greek-speaking world, would use it as a
book of magic. This is what we see among many Jewish sects, particularly
in Samaria, Egypt and among the Greek-speaking Jews. The tendency was
marked even in Galilee. Jesus Himself stigmatizes the morbid craving of
His countrymen for miracles as the mark of an "adulterous" generation,
because the power invoked was not divine, but always angelic, or even
demonic. Paul alludes to the same trait (1st Cor. i. 22). But while
there is a singular absence both from the Pauline and the Johannine
writings of any reference to exorcism, the typical miracle of Synoptic
story, it has been justly remarked that no element of Paul's thought
has been so little affected by that of Jesus as his angelology and
demonology. Paul's world-view, like that of the apocalypses of his time,
is a perfect phantasmagoria of angels and demons, "gods many and lords
many." His conception of the redemption conflict is not a wrestling
against flesh and blood, but against "world-rulers of this (lower region
of) darkness," against "archangels," "elements," "principalities,"
"powers." The one thing which takes away all harmful influence from this
credulity (if we must apply an unfairly modern judgment to an ancient
writer) is his doctrine of the Son ship and Lordship of Jesus, with whom
the redeemed are "joint-heirs" of the entire creation and thus superior
to angels. In this respect Paul has imbibed the mind of Christ. Jesus'
remedy for superstition is not scientific but religious. It does not
deny the popularly assumed relation to "spirits" good or evil, but
affirms a direct relation to the Infinite Spirit, which reduces all
angels and demons to insignificance save as "ministers." Paul's
world-view starts with the creation of man to be lord and heir of the
world (Gal. iv. 1; 1st Cor. iii. 22; _cf._ Gen. i. 28). The "purpose of
God, which he purposed in Christ Jesus, before the creation, unto a
dispensation of the fulness of the ages" is "to our glory." It would be
frustrated if the "Second Adam" did not become the Heir, in whom the
redeemed creation would find the goal of its long expectancy. Paul has a
cosmology as well as "Enoch." He could not be a worthy follower of
Jesus--he could not even be a loyal "son of the Law" without holding to
the accepted doctrine of the Inheritance intended for Messiah and his
obedient people. It did not make him less firm in this conviction when
as a Christian he thought of Jesus as the Messiah, and of Jew and
Gentile united in his kingdom; only the starting-point is not the
subjection of the sons of Abraham under Gentiles, but the subjection of
the sons of Adam under "world-rulers of this darkness." When he combines
Ps. viii. and Ps. cx. in his depiction of the reign of Christ in 1st
Cor. xv. 24-27, it is a sure indication of its scope as Paul understood
it. He included in the lordship over creation, and the subjection of all
"enemies" which the exalted Christ is awaiting "at the right hand of
God," the subjection of "angels, and principalities, and powers and
every name that is named, whether of beings in heaven, or on earth, or
under the earth." Paul pursues, then, the method of the apocalyptic
writers in making his doctrine of Redemption and the Kingdom
transcendental. By making it cosmic he undermines its Jewish
particularism. He avoids the superstition by holding firmly to Jesus'
doctrine of Son ship by _moral_ affinity with God.

In the Christological Epistles accordingly it is apparent that the
Pauline churches are learning to think of the coming Kingdom in a widely
different way from the 'apostolic.' The Greek doctrine of mystic union,
not the rabbinic of a "share in the world to come," is the basis. In due
time we shall see how difficult the process of reconciliation became
between Greek and Semitic thought in this field also. For the present we
can only note how in the great theme of the Unity of the Spirit in Eph.
iv. 1--vi. 9 it is not the 'apostolic' ideal of a restoration of the
kingdom to Israel according to the oath sworn to Abraham (Luke i. 68-75;
_cf._ Acts i. 6) that dominates, but an enlargement of the figure of the
body and members, a figure commonly employed by Stoic writers, to apply
to the unity of the church in Corinthians and Romans. In the Epistles of
the Captivity the doctrine of the Kingdom is a social organism permeated
and vitalized by Christ's spirit of service. Personal immortality is
union with the life of God.

In view of the notoriety of Ephesus as the very centre of the trade in
magic (so much so that spells and incantations were technically known as
"Ephesian letters") and of what Acts tells us of the enormous
destruction there of "books of magic" effected by Paul's preaching, it
is not surprising that Asia and Phrygia should appear a few years after
Paul's departure as the hot-bed of a "philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the 'elements' of the world, and not after
Christ." Acts xx. 29 makes Paul predict the heresy.

Such was especially the case at Coloss√¶, a little town long after
notorious for its superstition, where Epaphras, now Paul's
fellow-prisoner, had founded the church. Epaphras himself at the time of
Paul's writing was in great anxiety both for this church and for the
adjoining churches at Hierapolis and Laodicea. Colossians is written to
meet this danger, and was sent by the same bearers as the note to
Philemon. It was to be exchanged, after being read at Coloss√¶, for
another epistle sent simultaneously to Laodicea. Whether our Ephesians
is this companion letter or only a deutero-Pauline production framed on
the basis of some genuine letter written on this occasion, is a disputed
point among critics. In Marcion's canon our Ephesians was called
"Laodiceans," and in our own oldest textual authorities it has no
address. We may assume that Ephesians is really the companion letter,
whose original address was for some reason cancelled;[15] or that it is
but partially from Paul's own hand. Neither view will materially alter
our conception of his teaching, or the special application of it to the
circumstances of the churches of the Lycus Valley. The important thing
to observe is that whereas the application in Colossians is specific, in
Ephesians it is systematic and general. Colossians wages a direct
polemic against those who are making believers the spoil of mere
'Elements' by introducing distinctions of "meats _and drinks_" (a step
beyond Mosaism), with observance of "feast days, new moons and
sabbaths." In Ephesians we have, either altogether at first hand, or to
a greater or less extent at second, a general, affirmative presentation
of Paul's doctrine of Lordship in Christ. It has only incidental
allusion to being "deceived with empty words" (v. 6), and a warning not
to be "children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men in craftiness, after the wiles of error"
(iv. 14).

    Footnote 15: Harnack very ingeniously suggests as a reason the ill
    repute later incurred by Laodicea (_cf._ Rev. iii. 15 f.);
    comparing the chiselling out from inscriptions of the names of
    unpopular kings.

Colossians and Ephesians develop, accordingly, that (cosmological)
wisdom of God conveyed to Paul by the Spirit of Christ in a "mystery,"
at which he had only hinted in 1st Cor. ii. 1-16. Paul's _gnosis_, or
insight, concerns the purpose of God in creation, hidden even from the
(angelic) "world-rulers," who are coming to nought. The Spirit of
Christ, who as the divine Wisdom had been the agent of creation, is
given to Christian apostles and prophets. It affords them in the
revelation of this "mystery" a philosophy both of creation and
redemption which puts to shame mere speculative reasoning. The
Inheritance--the things God prepared for those that love Him--consists
(as an apocalyptic writer had said) of "things which eye had not seen,
nor ear heard, nor had entered into the heart of man to conceive." Paul
had purposely refrained from unfolding this revealed cosmology and
philosophy of history to the Corinthians, in order to avoid just the
evils which the teaching of Apollos had apparently precipitated at the
time when 1st Corinthians was written. Still, we can gain from this very
epistle (1st Cor. viii. 6; xv. 24-28) a partial conception of his
doctrine of Christ as the beginning and end of the creation, the Wisdom
of God by whom and for whom as Heir, all things were created. From
Romans i.-viii. and ix.-xi. we can easily see that as Second Adam the
Messiah was to Paul the key to the world's development and to human
history; for since the triumph of Satan in Eden the whole creation had
waited, groaning, for the advent of the sons. Galatians makes it no less
clear that he thought of the Cross as the epoch-making event, which
marks the transition from the period of the control of the world by
secondary agencies, to the rule of the Son. This "mystery" is simply
brought out and developed now in the Epistles of the Captivity. The
effort and prayer is that the readers may "have the eyes of their heart
enlightened," obtain something of Paul's own insight into the riches of
the inheritance they are to share with Christ, something of Paul's
experience of the power of God in raising Christ from the dead and
setting Him on the throne of glory. If they but realize what Son ship
and heirship with Christ implies--if they but take in the fact that by
the resurrection Spirit within them they have already in a sense shared
in this deliverance and this exaltation, they will be forearmed against
all the vain deceits of theosophy. It is in fact this resurrection
Spirit which brings about the unity of the world as a single organism.
It extends from the uppermost height to the nethermost abyss. And
because it is the Spirit of Jesus, it fills all it touches with the
disposition to loving service. It affords a new ethics and a new
politics whose keynote is the law of love in imitation of God and
Christ. All social relations are recreated by it, beginning with family
and church. Hence we must think of our redemption as like Israel's from
the bondage and darkness of Egypt. The principalities and powers of this
world, spiritual hosts of wickedness in the super-terrestrial regions,
are vainly endeavouring to hold back the people of God, in "this
darkness." We have only to wait like Israel at the Passover "with our
loins girt, and our feet shod." The Deliverer will soon appear from
heaven, clad in armour of salvation, as in the ancient passover songs,
cleaving the darkness with his sword of light, and leading forth the
captives.

In these themes, variously interwoven in Ephesians and Colossians, it is
difficult to say whether it is the note of unity or the note of freedom
which predominates. Certainly we can recognize the same great apostle of
liberty who in the epistles of the earlier period had proved the power
and value of his religious insight by seizing upon the doctrine of Son
ship as the essential heart of the gospel. It is the same genius
consciously taught of God who had demanded and obtained recognition on
equal terms for his gospel of Grace and Son ship, a gospel given by
revelation of God's Son "in" him, who now demands that the gift of the
Spirit to Jew and Gentile be recognized as calling for reconstruction of
the doctrine of the coming Kingdom. "He that ascended is the same also
that descended to the lowest depths that he might fill all things." And
he poured out the "gifts" in order that they might make one organism of
the new social order, a new creation animated and vitalized by Jesus'
spirit of loving service.

For just as in all the great earlier epistles the note of longing for
peace and unity in love rings ever stronger and clearer above the
strife, so in the later epistles, the note of triumph in liberty has a
deep under-chord of thanksgiving for reconciliation achieved. The great
p√¶an of reverent adoration for the glory of God's grace in Eph. i. 3-14,
is a thanksgiving for the union of Jew and Gentile in one common
redemption. The retrospect of the work of God in ii. 11-21 is the
proclamation of "peace to him that was far off and peace to him that was
nigh." It is described as the building of Jew and Gentile into one
living temple, upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ
Jesus Himself being the chief corner-stone. The exhortation to the unity
of the Spirit in iv. 1--vi. 9 rests upon an exultant application of the
figure of the "one new man" in whose body all are members, that would be
inconceivable if at the time of writing the church which had received
the gifts from the ascended Lord was not indeed one body, but two bodies
standing apart in mutual distrust and jealousy.

In fact we may say not of Ephesians only, but of Colossians likewise,
and indeed of all the group: Their keynote is not so much the conquest
of all things by Christ as "the reconciliation of all things in Christ,
whether things upon the earth, or things in the heavens" (Col. i. 20).
It is not unreasonable to infer from such undertones as these that the
prayer was answered in which Paul when he set out from Corinth had
besought the Roman church by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of
the Spirit to strive together with him, that his ministration which he
had for Jerusalem might be acceptable to the saints, that so his coming
to them in Rome through the will of God might be in joy, and that
together with them he might find rest.




CHAPTER V

PSEUDO-APOSTOLIC EPISTLES


We cannot wonder that an epoch of the church's history which followed
upon the martyrdom in rapid succession of all its remaining great
leaders, should at first be poor in literary products. James the Lord's
brother was stoned to death by a mob in Jerusalem in the year 61-2. His
namesake, brother of John, had been beheaded early in 44 by Herod
Agrippa I. Among the "others" who, as Josephus informs us, perished
along with James in 61, we may, perhaps, reckon John, who stands beside
him in Paul's list of the Pillars. This John, son of Zebedee, brother of
the other James, is reckoned a martyr in the same sense as his brother
in the earliest gospels. The brothers are assured that they shall drink
the same cup of suffering as the Lord, though they may not claim in
return pre-eminent seats in glory (Mark x. 39 f.). John did not suffer
with his brother James in 44, because he is present at the conference in
46-7 (Gal. ii. 9); but one of the traditions of the Jerusalem elders
reported by Papias declared that he was "killed by the Jews" in
fulfilment of the Lord's prediction, and this early tradition must be
accepted in spite of its conflict with one which gradually superseded it
after John came to be regarded as author of Revelation and the Fourth
Gospel. The statement that he was killed "together with James his
brother" may be due merely to the (not infrequent) confusion of the two
Jameses.

Paul's decapitation in Rome occurred not more than a year or two later,
and was followed there in 64, according to very ancient and trustworthy
tradition, by the martyrdom of Peter. The death of all the principal
leaders explains why the Jerusalem church when it reassembled after the
overthrow of city and temple in the year 70, put forward no more
prominent candidates for the leadership than a certain Symeon, son of
Clopas, one of the group of 'relatives of the Lord' who are traceable
"until the time of Trajan," and a certain unknown Thebuthis. Symeon,
according to Eusebius, who takes his account from Hegesippus (165), was
the representative of "those of the apostles and disciples of the Lord
that were still living, together with the Lord's relatives." Thebuthis
is said to have sprung from one of the heretical Jewish sects and to
have organized a schism in consequence of his disappointment. All we can
be sure of is that Jerusalem 'down to the time of Trajan' continued to
regard itself as the seat of apostolic authority and arbiter of
orthodoxy, on account of its succession of disciples and relatives of
the Lord. Among the latter the leading, if not the only, representatives
of the seed of David, when "search was made" in the persecution under
Domitian (81-95), were two _grandsons_ of Jude, the Lord's brother. Jude
himself, then, was no longer living. Luke (_c._ 100), Papias (145), and
Hegesippus (165) successively exhibit the growing authority of the
"tradition handed down," especially that of "the apostles and elders in
Jerusalem." But what Papias records of the traditions of these "elders"
does not rise above the level of Jewish midrash, and the epistles which
bear the names of James and Jude have little intrinsic value, and
enjoyed from the beginning only the most meagre acceptance. At Rome
tradition attaches to the name of Peter, but besides the bare fact of
his martyrdom "at the same time with Paul" (64-5) it has little of value
to relate. We cannot safely go beyond the tradition reported by Porphyry
that Peter fed the lambs (at Rome) for a few months before his
martyrdom, and that reported by Papias that Mark, who had been Peter's
assistant, compiled there the Gospel which bears his name, basing it
upon his recollections of Peter's preaching. Of this vitally important
work (_c._ A.D. 75) we must speak in another connection. We are
concerned at present with writings which directly reflect the
development of Christian life and doctrine in this sub-apostolic
period, especially that in the Pauline mission-field.

Except for the appearance of the Gospel of Mark at Rome (_c._ 75) there
remains nothing to break the silence and darkness of twenty years after
the deaths of James and Peter and Paul. The writings which finally did
appear were almost inevitably anonymous or pseudepigraphic, because
apostolic authority stood so high that no other could secure
circulation. Hebrews (_c._ 85) has an epistolary attachment at the close
of its "exhortation," but either never had an address or superscription,
or else has been deprived of it. All the Synoptic writings are
anonymous, though Luke-Acts (_c._ 100) is dedicated to a literary
patron. Revelation (_c._ 95) is boldly asserted to be the work of the
Apostle John in the prefatory chapters and the epilogue (i. 2, 4, 9;
xxii. 8). But the body of the work, though of Palestinian origin, has a
totally different standpoint, and claims the authority of a prophet, not
that of an apostle. Similarly the Fourth gospel when finally published
received an appendix (ch. xxi.) which cautiously suggests the Apostle
John as its author; but the three Epistles by the same writer are
anonymous. The homily called James (90-100) has a superscription which
superficially connects it with the chief authority in Jerusalem, and the
Epistle of Jude prefixes to itself the name which stood next in the same
class. But even in antiquity they had a precarious standing, and
neither is a real letter. Finally there are the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, purporting to be written by Paul, and a whole series of every
kind, epistles, gospel, acts, and apocalypse, written in the name of
Peter, of which only two secured final adoption into the canon. Of all
these only 1st Peter and the so-called Pastoral Epistles (1st and 2nd
Timothy and Titus) have some claim to be considered genuine; for 1st
Peter is certainly of early origin (_c._ 85), and was undisputed in
antiquity; while the Pastorals, though rejected by Marcion, and as a
whole of late date (90-110), are made up on the basis of some authentic
Pauline material.

The post-apostolic epistles may be grouped into two classes, according
as they are predominantly occasioned (_a_) by internal dangers of heresy
and moral laxity; or (_b_) by the external peril of persecution. To the
former (_a_) must be reckoned (1) the so-called Pastoral Epistles; (2)
Jude; (3) 2nd Peter. All these concern themselves outspokenly with a
type of false doctrine which has certain more or less definite traits,
and is tending toward the Gnostic heresies of the second century, if not
yet clearly identifiable with them. But the inspired genius of Paul is
wanting. The age is not creative, but conservative. Its writers are
ecclesiastics and church teachers, not apostles and prophets. Their
distinctive note is appeal to apostolic authority. Whether the name by
which they cover their own insignificance be that of "Paul," or "Jude
the brother (son?) of James," or "Peter," they have little or no
independent message. They hark back to the "pattern of sound words" the
"deposit," "the faith once for all delivered to the saints," "the words
spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandments of the Lord and
Saviour through your apostles," in particular the "wisdom of our beloved
brother Paul" who (in the Pastoral Epistles) had predicted the heresy,
and "in all his epistles" had spoken of the resurrection and judgment.
Second Peter, which refers in the passage just quoted (2nd Pet. iii. 2,
15 f.) to the Pauline Epistles alongside "the other Scriptures"
belongs to a very late period (_c._ 150). In fact this Epistle, now
almost universally recognized to be pseudonymous, merely re√´dits the
Epistle of Jude, supplying a prefix (ch. i.) and an appendix (ch. iii.)
to make special application of its denunciations to the case of the
false teachers who were "denying the (bodily) resurrection and the
judgment." Neither plagiarism nor pseudonymity were recognized offences
at the time; so that we bring no indictment against the author of 2nd
Peter, were he the Apostle or not. Still our conception of the Galilean
fisherman will be higher without this example of pulpit rhetoric than
with it.

Of the nature of the heresies controverted in this series of writings we
must speak later. As to the region whence they originate something can
be made out already. Not indeed from 2nd Peter, which is of too late
date to be of service. True the readers addressed are assumed to be the
same as in the first epistle, in other words the Pauline mission-field
of Asia Minor (1st Pet. i. 1), and there is reason to think "Asia" was
the region first affected. "Ephesus" and "Asia" are in fact the regions
affected in 1st and 2nd Timothy (1st Tim. i. 3 f.; 2nd Tim. i. 15).
Moreover it is in this same region that we find Polycarp (110-117)
adverting to those who "pervert the sayings of the Lord to their own
lusts, and deny the resurrection and judgment." To the same region and
the same period belong the letters of "the Spirit" in Rev. i.-iii. (_c._
95) with their denunciation of the Balaamite and Nicolaitan heretics,
and still further 1st-3rd John and the Epistles of Ignatius, which are
also polemics against a Gnostic heresy (Doketism) tending to moral
laxity. It is doubtful, however, in view of the general address (2nd
Pet. i. 1), whether the author of 2nd Peter really has a definite circle
in mind, and does not rather in iii. 1 mistakenly treat 1st Peter as a
general epistle. Denial of the resurrection and judgment was not limited
to one locality or period. Hegesippus regards it as a pre-Christian
heresy combated already by James. Equally precarious would be the
assumption that Jude, with its similar general address, was necessarily
intended for Asia Minor. The false teachers resemble those we know of
there, and the denunciation is incorporated by 2nd Peter, but 'Cainites'
and 'Balaamites' were not confined to the regions of 1st John and
Revelation, and Jude might have almost any date between 90 and 120. The
most that can be said is that before the death of Paul the last view we
obtain of his mission-field shows it exposed, especially in the region
of Ephesus, to a rising flood of superstition and false doctrine, while
documents that can be dated with some definiteness in 95-117, such as
Revelation, the Johannine and Ignatian Epistles, and the letter of
Polycarp, show a great advance of heretical teaching in the same region.
The later heresy corresponds in several respects to that combated in
the Pastorals, Jude and 2nd Peter, but becomes at last more distinctly
definable as Doketism, whose most obnoxious form comes to be denial of
the (bodily) resurrection and judgment. The three Pastoral Epistles,
Jude and 2nd Peter may, therefore, be taken as probably reflecting the
growing internal danger confronted by the churches of Asia (if not by
all the churches) in the sub-apostolic age.

Unfortunately, literary relations sometimes interfere with historical
classification, and we are, therefore, compelled to defer treatment of
1st-3rd John and the Epistles of "the Spirit" to the churches (Rev. i.
3), which really belong to our present group (_a_) of writings against
the heresies of (proconsular) Asia. Their relation to the special canon
of Ephesus, whose writings are all ascribed to John, makes it convenient
to consider them in another connection. The reader should bear in mind,
however, that the group extends continuously down to the Epistles of
Ignatius and centres upon Ephesus, where, according to Acts xx. 29 f.,
the "grievous wolves" were to enter in after Paul's departing.

Similar considerations affect the grouping of the Epistle of James,
which almost demands a class by itself. It might be called
anti-heretical, except that its nature is the reverse of controversial,
and its author seems to have no direct contact with the false teachers.
In a remote and general way he deplores the vain talk and disputation
which go hand in hand with a relaxation of the practical Christian
virtues. On the whole it seems more correct to class James with 1st
Peter and Hebrews, particularly as it displays direct literary
dependence on the former, if not on both.

Our second group (_b_) consists of writings not primarily concerned with
heresy. Its first and best example speaks in the name of Peter as
representative of "apostolic" Christianity at Rome. But the doctrine,
and even the phraseology and illustrations of 1st Peter are largely
borrowed from the greater Epistles of Paul, particularly Romans and
Ephesians. Nothing even remotely suggests an author who had enjoyed
personal relations with Jesus, or could relate his wonderful words and
deeds. On the contrary the doctrine is Paul's gospel minus the sting of
the abolition of the Law. In view of the known internal conditions of
the churches to which 1st Peter is addressed in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, _Asia_ and Bithynia it is remarkable how completely the
subject of heresy or false doctrine is ignored. Their adversary the
devil is not at present taking the form of a seducing serpent (2nd Cor.
xi. 3), but of a "roaring lion" openly destroying and devouring (1st
Pet. v. 8 f.), and the same sufferings the Asiatics are called upon to
endure are being inflicted upon their brethren throughout the world. A
systematic, universal "fiery persecution" is going on, which has come
almost as a surprise (iv. 12) and may compel any believer, after having
made "defence" before the magistrate of "the hope that is in him," to
"suffer as a Christian" and to "glorify God in this name." The author
exhorts to irreproachable conduct as citizens, and kindness and good
order in the brotherhood. If such blamelessness of living be combined
with patient endurance of the unjust punishment, Christians who still
must sanctify in their hearts Christ (and not the Emperor) as Lord, will
ultimately be left unharmed.

Superior as is this noble exhortation to patient endurance of suffering
in the meekness of Christ to the controversial rhetoric of 2nd Peter,
immeasurably better as is its attestation in ancient and modern times,
even the most conservative modern critics are compelled to regard it as
at least semi-pseudonymous. It might be just possible to carry back the
conditions of persecution presupposed to the time of Nero. But if it be
Peter writing from Rome after the recent martyrdoms of James and Paul,
why is there no allusion to either? Again, we might possibly prolong the
life of Peter (against all probability) down to the beginning of the
reign of Domitian (81-95). In that case the absence of any allusion to
the great events of recent occurrence in Palestine would be almost
equally hard to explain. Moreover, with any dating the real author
remains a literary man, a Paulinist, a Grecian Jew, and the share
attributable to Peter personally becomes most shadowy. The simpler, and
(as the present writer has come to believe) the more probable view is
that 1st Peter, like the later writings which assumed the name, is
wholly pseudonymous. If, however, it appeared (as we are persuaded) some
twenty years after the Apostle's death, among those perfectly aware of
the fact, assuming no other disguise, but frankly dealing with the
existing situation, this is a kind of pseudonymity which should be
classed with literary fictions and conventions which are harmless
because (at the time) perfectly transparent. Letters written under
fictitious names were in fact a very common literary device of the age.

At all events the Apostle appears as an old man (v. 1) writing from
"Babylon"--rightly taken by the fathers to be a cryptogram for Rome.
Salutations are conveyed from Mark, his "son" (_cf._ Philem. i. 10). The
bearer (writer?) is represented to be Silvanus (like Mark a companion of
Paul with relations to Jerusalem as well), and Silvanus is commended as
a "trustworthy" disciple. The author states it as his object to "exhort
and testify that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand."

Ignorant as we are of its author's name it is fortunate for our study of
the times that the date of 1st Peter is fairly determinable by the
convergence of external and internal evidence. Echoes from it appear
already in Clement of Rome (95) as well as in James and Hermas. We must
think of it, then, as a hand of cordial encouragement extended by a
representative of the Petro-Pauline church at Rome, soon after the
outbreak of the persecution of Domitian (_c._ 90), to the still
independent but suffering churches of Asia Minor. If we remember that it
undertakes to endorse the doctrine of one third of contemporary
Christendom, and (in substance) offers a 'letter of commendation' to
Silvanus, it will be obvious that no name of less authority than that of
Peter could have served. As Zahn has well remarked: "The significant
thing ... is that it is Peter, the most distinguished apostle of the
circumcision (Gal. ii. 7) who bears witness to the genuineness of their
state of grace."

We must place alongside of 1st Peter one other epistle in which the
motive of exhortation to endurance of persecution without relaxation of
the moral standard is prominent, though not exclusive, and a second,
wherein it appears only in a faint echo of "trials," which turn out,
however, as the reader proceeds, to be only "temptations," while the
real occasion of writing is plain--moral relaxation without either
heresy or persecution to excuse it. The two writings in question are the
anonymous "exhortation" handed down under the title "To the Hebrews,"
and the so-called Epistle (in reality a homily) of James. Hebrews begins
as an exposition of the two psalms Paul had quoted in his reference in
