1st Cor. xv. 24-28 to the exaltation of Jesus (Pss. viii. and cx.)
proving Him to be the Son, who, after temporary subordination to the
angels, has been exalted above them to the place of supreme dominion.
Christ has thus effected a greater redemption than Moses and Joshua. He
is also a "high-priest after the order of Melchizedek" according to Ps.
cx.; so that the Aaronic priesthood and ceremonial are surpassed as well
as the Mosaic legislation, by the sacrifice of Calvary and intercession
of the risen Redeemer. It is no wonder that in the period of debate
against Judaism the canon-makers gave to this anonymous sermon a title
which ranks it first in the class of subsequent controversial pamphlets
"against the Jews." Controversy, however, is subordinate in the writer's
purpose to edification. He is not unconscious of the dangers of that
superstitious 'worship of the angels,' against which Paul's Asian
epistles had been directed, but his demonstration of the superiority of
the institutions and aims of Christianity to those of Judaism has the
practical object of reinforcing the courage and "faith" of his readers
under pressure of persecution. His argument culminates in an inspiring
list of Scriptural heroes and martyrs, leading up as a climax to "Jesus
the author and perfecter of our faith." As Jesus endured, looking beyond
the shame and suffering of the cross to the joy of His reward, so should
the readers "endure their chastening." Apostacy will meet a fearful doom
in the judgment of fire. To this homily (Heb. i.-xii.) is appended a
concluding chapter (probably by the author himself) which transforms it
into a letter. The author is a church-teacher of the second generation,
as he frankly confesses himself (ii. 3); a disciple of Paul, to judge by
his use of Paul's doctrine and some of his epistles, especially Romans.
To judge by his rhetorical style and his Alexandrian ideas and mode of
thought, he is the sort of teacher Apollos will have been. Just at
present he is separated from his flock (xiii. 19). Where they are we
can only infer from xiii. 24, which conveys salutations from those in
the writer's neighbourhood who are "from Italy." He himself is probably
among the Pauline churches, for he sends news of Timothy (xiii. 23) and
hopes to come soon in company with him. Ephesus, where Apollos was at
last accounts, may possibly be the place of writing. Hebrews would seem
then to be written to Rome, long after the first "great fight of
afflictions" (the Neronian outbreak of 64) and when the danger of
"fainting under the chastening" of a second persecution (that of
Domitian _c._ 90) was imminent. Such slight indications as we have of a
literary relation between Hebrews and 1st Peter suggest the priority of
Hebrews, but the date and occasion must be nearly the same.

"James" is also a homily exhorting to patient endurance, but there is
nothing to suggest its having ever been sent anywhere as a letter, save
the brief superscription written in imitation of 1st Pet. i. 1. "James
... to the twelve tribes of the Dispersion." Imagine the mode of
delivery! Nor is it called forth by any special emergency. There is an
allusion to false doctrine. It is the heresy (!) of "justification by
faith apart from works." But the writer is no more conscious of
contradicting Paul than is Luke in describing Paul's apostleship and
gospel. He merely impersonates the 'bishop of bishops' addressing
Christendom at large, deprecating the loquacity of the "many teachers,"
and commending the 'wisdom' of a "good life" instead. There is protest
against oppression. But it is only the oppression of the poor by the
rich in the Christian brotherhood. He returns to this subject con amore.
Evidently the church of his age is characterized by worldliness both of
thought and conduct, among clergy and laity. But all colour of region or
period is wanting. Take 1st Peter, substitute the head of the Jerusalem
succession for the head of the Roman, remove the Pauline doctrine, the
traces of Jesus and his gospel of Son ship, remove the special
references to local conditions and particular emergencies, leaving only
moral generalities, and the result will be not unlike the Epistle of
James. The author has heard something of Paulinism, has read Hebrews
(Jas. ii. 21-25; v. 10), and imitated 1st Peter (Jas. i. 1, 18, 21; iv.
6 f.; v. 20). Strong arguments have even been advanced to prove that
he was not a Christian at all. He probably was, if only from his
literary connection with the above-named earlier writings, and the
influence exerted by his own on Hermas (Rome, 120-140), and perhaps
Clement (Rome, 95). But as for connection with the historic
Jesus--"Elijah" is his example of the man of prayer (v. 13-18), and
"Job" and "the prophets" his "example of suffering and patience" (v. 10
f.). Hebrews can show more of the influence of Jesus than this (Heb.
v. 7 f., xii. 2-4). Like Hermas (who, however, does not even mention
the name of Jesus) 'James' thinks of Him simply as "the Lord of glory,"
without raising the question how He came to be such.

Apart from the superscription, whose object is only to clothe the homily
with the authority of a name revered throughout the 'catholic' church,
there is nothing to connect James with Syria rather than any other
region outside Paul's mission-field. Even Palestine might be its place
of origin if the date were late enough to account for the Greek style.
At all events it comes first to our knowledge at Rome. There is some
reason to think that Clement of Rome (A.D. 95), whose moralizing is of a
similar type, has been directly influenced by James. If so we have in
James, Clement and Hermas a series illustrative of the decline at Rome
of the Pauline gospel of conscious revelation and inspiration toward the
hum-drum levels of mere 'catholic' catechetics.

With every allowance for differences among critics as to date and origin
of the non-controversial epistles of the sub-apostolic age, it is easy
to see that the resistless march of events is taking up and
accomplishing Paul's effort and prayer for the unity of the two branches
of the Church. One great event of this period, which for us stands out
with startling vividness upon the pages of history, is curiously without
trace or reflection in this literature. We search the New Testament in
vain for the slightest allusion (outside the writings directly or
indirectly derived from Palestine itself) to the fall of Jerusalem in
A.D. 70, and the consequent cessation of Jewish national life and temple
ceremonial. The remoteness of the writers with whom we are dealing both
in time and national interest from the affairs of Jerusalem is not the
only cause. The fate of the temple had no effect to weaken the types of
Judaism with which the church of the sub-apostolic age had to contend.
The Pharisaic legalism of the synagogue became only the stronger when
the hollow Sadducean priesthood collapsed, and temple ceremonial became
simply a ceremonial on paper, the affair no longer of priest and Levite,
but of scribe and Pharisee. So also with the denationalized Judaism of
the Dispersion, a more insidious danger for early converts from
heathenism than the stricter, legalistic type. The crushing of the
nationalistic rebellion, the temporary suppression of the war-party, the
Zealots, only strengthened and promoted Pharisaism, and the Dispersion
was scarcely affected by the losses of the war. When Jerusalem and the
temple fell, temple and city had become entirely superfluous factors to
both parties in the great strife of church versus synagogue. Hebrews
knows of a type of Judaism which is formidable by reason of the appeal
of its ordinances of angels and its sacerdotal system written in a book
of acknowledged divine authority. But the characteristic point is that
in Hebrews, as truly as in Barnabas and Justin Martyr, it is only the
prescription and not the practice which is in question. But for the fact
that the "new testament" of Heb. ix. 15 is still unwritten, its
controversy might properly be described as a battle of books.

On the other hand the pressure of persecution without, combined with the
disappearance of creative leadership within, is visibly forcing the
independent provinces of Christendom toward organic unity under the
principle of apostolic authority. First Peter is the first and greatest
evidence of this tendency to union promoted by external pressure.
Hebrews and James follow as illustrative of the need felt for
maintaining the standards both of doctrine and of morals at their full
height. Christianity must not be thought of as on a level with Judaism,
it is the final and universal revelation. It must not be practised
half-heartedly, with "double-mindedness," nor in vain philosophizing and
professions belied by deeds. It must be obeyed as a new and royal law,
the mirror of divine perfection.

If, then, we turn from these evidences of general conditions in church
and empire to the inward dangers revealed by the writings against
heresy, we shall see how this disruptive influence, already distinctly
apprehended in Paul's later writings, makes itself more and more
strongly felt, and in more and more definite form, with Ephesus and the
churches of Asia as its chief breeding-place.

The Pastoral Epistles in their present form cannot be dated much before
the time when they begin to be used by Ignatius and Polycarp (110-117).
Indeed some phrases (perhaps editorial additions) seem to imply a still
later date, as when in 1st Tim. vi. 20, Timothy is warned against the
"antitheses of miscalled Gnosis," as if with direct reference to
Marcion's system of this title. Their avowed purpose is to counteract
the inroads of heresy, and the remedy applied is ecclesiastical
authority and discipline. Far more of Paul's inspired gospel of Son ship
and liberty, far more of his conception of the redemption in Christ as a
triumph over the spiritual world-rulers of this darkness, is found in
1st Peter and Hebrews than here. Nothing appears of Paul's broad
horizon, his spirit of missionary conquest, his devotion to the unity of
Jew and Gentile in their common access to the Father in one Spirit.
There is no trace of the great Pauline doctrines of the conflict of
flesh and spirit, the superseding of the dispensation of Law by the
dispensation of Grace, the Adoption, the Redemption, the Inheritance.
The attention is turned wholly to local conditions, maintenance of the
transmitted doctrine and order, resistance to the advance of "vain
talk," "Jewish fables," "foolish questionings, genealogies and strifes
about the Law," which go hand in hand with moral laxity. In short the
outlook and temper are those of the Epistle of James, while the remedy
is that of Acts and the Epistles of Ignatius. The Paul who here speaks
is not the missionary and mystic, but the shrewd ecclesiastic. There is
only too much evidence to show that in the Pauline mission-field the
remedy resorted to against the licence in thought and action which
threatened decadence and dissolution after apostolic inspiration had
died out, was the religion of authority, doctrinal and disciplinary, not
the religion of the Spirit. Ecclesiastical appointees take the place as
teachers and defenders of the faith of those who had been the inspired
apostles and prophets of its extension.

And on the other side are the false teachers. They are of Jewish
character in their doctrine, aspiring to be "teachers of the Law" though
really ignorant of its meaning. The worst of them are actual Jews (Tit.
i. 10), which implies that some were not. Moreover the type of doctrine
is still less like the Pharisaism of the synagogue than the "philosophy
and vain deceit" rebuked by Paul at Colossæ. There is similar
distinction of meats (treated in 2nd Tim. iv. 1-5 as a doctrine of
"seducing spirits and demons"), and a prohibition of wine and marriage.
There is side by side with this ascetic tendency one equally marked
toward libertinism and love of money (2nd Tim. iii. 1-9). Both phases
remind us of the "concision" of Paul's later letters. But besides the
larger development new features appear of Hellenistic rather than Jewish
type. The new doctrine of the resurrection as something "past already"
is more closely connected with the Pauline mysticism, the present union
of the believer with the life of Christ "hid in God," than with the
Jewish idea of return to earth in resuscitated flesh. The Paulinist of
the Pastorals is already foreshadowing the great conflict of Ignatius,
Justin and Irenæus against those who "denied the resurrection,"
perverting (as the fathers allege) the meaning of Paul's saying, "flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God" (_cf._ 2nd Pet. iii. 16).
And the Pastorals tend toward the un-Pauline doctrine soon to be
formulated in the 'catholic' church: "I believe in the resurrection of
the _flesh_." Again the false doctrine now distinctly avows itself a
form of Gnosis. "They profess that they know God, but by their works
they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate." And our Paulinist's remedy is the traditional doctrine,
the "pattern of sound words," the "deposit" of the Church teacher, more
especially the whole-some words, "even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness." Thus even the
rich, if they do good, and become "rich in good works" will "lay up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come."

We have only to place these pseudo-Pauline writings side by side with
the Epistles of John and Ignatius to recognize the advance of the heresy
which soon declared itself as Gnostic Doketism, with the Jew Cerinthus
at Ephesus as its principal exponent. Moreover this steadily increasing
inward danger of the Pauline mission-field, a danger not merely sporadic
like the outbursts of persecution, but constant and increasing, is
forcing the two great branches of the Christian brotherhood together on
the basis of 'catholicity' and the 'apostolic' tradition. Between the
churches of the Ægean and that of Rome, where both parties stand on
neutral ground, there are exchanged generous and sympathetic assurances
of essential unity of doctrine in the great outbreak of persecution in
85-90. Among the Pauline churches themselves there is an irresistible
reaction against the vagaries and moral laxity of heretical teaching
toward 'apostolic' tradition and ecclesiastical authority. It appears
with almost startling vividness in the Pastoral Epistles, and meets its
answer from without, perhaps from Rome, perhaps from Syria, in the
homily dressed as an encyclical called the Epistle of James. It is not
hard to foresee what sort of Christian unity is destined to come about.
Nevertheless the creative spirit and genius of Paul was to find
expression in one more splendid product of Ephesus before the Roman
unity was to be achieved.--But before we take up the writings of the
great 'theologian' of Ephesus we must trace the growth in Syria and at
Rome of the Literature of the Church Teacher and Prophet.




PART III

THE LITERATURE OF CATECHIST AND PROPHET


CHAPTER VI

THE MATTHÆAN TRADITION OF THE PRECEPTS OF JESUS


As we have seen in our study of the later literature addressed to, or
emanating from, the Pauline mission-field, the church teacher and
ecclesiastic who there took up the pen after the death of Paul had
scarcely any alternative but to follow the literary model of the great
founder of Gentile Christianity. Inevitably the typical literary product
of this region became the apostolic letter, framed on the model of
Paul's, borrowing his phraseology and ideas, when not actually embodying
fragments from his pen and covering itself with his name. Homilies are
made over into "epistles." Even 'prophecy,' to obtain literary
circulation, must have prefixed epistles of "the Spirit" to the
churches; and when at last a gospel is produced, this too is
accompanied, as we shall see, by three successive layers of enclosing
'epistles.'

At the seat of 'apostolic' Christianity it was equally inevitable that
the literary products should follow a different model. Here, from the
beginning, the standard of authority had been the commandment of Jesus.
Apostleship had meant ability to transmit his teaching, not endowment
with insight into the mystery of the divine purpose revealed in his
cross and resurrection. "The gospel" was the gospel _of_ Jesus. The
letters of Paul, if they circulated at all in Syria and Cilicia at this
early time, have had comparatively small effect on writers like Luke and
James. At Rome the case was somewhat different. Here Pauline influence
had been effectually superimposed upon an originally Jewish-Christian
stock. The Roman Gospel of Mark, accordingly, has just the
characteristics we should expect from this Petro-Pauline community.
Antioch, too, though at the disruption over the question of
table-fellowship it took the side of James, Peter, and Barnabas against
Paul, had always had a strong Gentile element. But Jerusalem, the church
of the apostles and elders, with its caliphate in the family of Jesus,
and its zeal for Jewish institutions and the Law, was the pre-eminent
seat of traditional authority. No other gospel, oral or written, could
for a moment compare in its eyes with its own cherished treasury of the
precepts of Jesus. Its own estimate of itself as conservator of
orthodoxy, and custodian of the sacred deposit, vividly reflected from
the pages of Hegesippus, was increasingly accepted by the other
churches. 'James' and 'Jude' were probably not the real names of the
writers of these 'general' or 'catholic' epistles; but they show in what
direction men looked when there was need to counteract a widespread
tendency to moral relaxation and vain disputations, or to demoralizing
heresy.

We have also seen how inevitable was the reaction after Paul's death,
even among his own churches, toward a historic standard of authority.
Even more marked than the disposition to draw together in fraternal
sympathy under persecution, is the reliance shown by the Pastoral
Epistles on "health-giving words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ" (1st Tim. vi. 3), and on a consolidated apostolic succession as
a bulwark against the disintegrating advance of heresy. In (proconsular)
Asia early in the second century there is an unmistakable and sweeping
disposition to "turn to the word handed down to us from the beginning"
(_Ep. of Polyc._, vii.) against those who were "perverting the sayings
of the Lord to their own lusts." The ancient "word of prophecy" and the
former revelations granted to apostolic seers were also turned to
account by men like Papias and the author of 2nd Peter against those who
"denied the resurrection and judgment."

This Papias of Hierapolis, the friend and colleague of Polycarp, had
undertaken in opposition to "the false teachers, and those who have so
very much to say," to write (probably after the utter destruction of the
community of 'apostles, elders, and witnesses' at Jerusalem in 135), _an
Exposition of the Sayings of the Lord_. He based the work on authentic
tradition of the Jerusalem witnesses, two of whom (Aristion, and John
'the Elder') were still living at the time of his inquiries. In fact,
this much debated "John the Elder," clearly distinguished by Papias from
John the "disciple of the Lord," may be identified, in our judgment,
with the John mentioned by Eusebius and Epiphanius midway in the
succession of 'Elders' of the Jerusalem church between A.D. 62 and 135.
Epiphanius dates his death in 117. Papias gives us practically all the
information we have regarding the beginnings of gospel literature. He
may have known all four of our Gospels. He certainly knew Revelation and
"vouched for its trustworthiness," doubtless against the deniers of the
resurrection and judgment. He "used testimonies" from 1st John, and
probably the saying of Jesus of John xiv. 2; but he seems to have based
his _Exposition_ on two gospels only, giving what he had been able to
learn of their history from travellers who reported to him testimonies
of 'the elders.' Papias' two gospels were our Matthew and our Mark,
whose differences he reconciled by what the Jerusalem elders had
reported as to their origin. Matthew, according to these authorities
(?), represented in its Greek form a collection of the Precepts of the
Lord which had formerly been current in the original Aramaic, so that
its circulation had of course been limited to Palestine. The original
compiler had been the Apostle Matthew. Various Greek equivalents of this
compilation had taken its place where Aramaic was not current. Thus
Papias, in explicit dependence on "the Elder" so far as Mark is
concerned, but without special designation of his authority for the
statement regarding Matthew. It is even possible that his representation
that the primitive Matthew was "in the Hebrew tongue" may be due to
rumours whose real starting-point was nothing more than the _Gospel of
the Nazarenes_, a product of _c._ 110-140 which misled many later
fathers, particularly Jerome. We cannot afford, however, to slight the
general bearing of testimony borne by one such as Papias regarding the
origins of gospel composition, and particularly the two branches into
which the tradition was divided. For Papias had made diligent inquiry.
Moreover his witness does not stand alone, but has the support of still
more ancient reference (_e. g._ 1st Tim. vi. 3, Acts i. 1) and the
internal evidence of the Synoptic Gospels themselves. The motive for his
statement is apologetic. Differences between the two Gospels had been
pointed out on the score both of words and events. Papias shows that
Gospel tradition is not to be held responsible for verbal agreement
between the two parallel reports of the Lord's words. The differences
are attributable to translation. So, too, regarding events. Exact
correspondence of Mark with Matthew (or other gospels) is not to be
looked for, especially as regards the order; because Mark had not
himself been a disciple, and could not get the true order from Peter,
whose anecdotes he reproduced; for when Mark wrote Peter was no longer
living. Mark has reproduced faithfully and accurately his recollection
of "things either said or done," as related by Peter. But Peter had had
no such intention as Matthew of making a systematic compilation
(_syntagma_) of the sayings of the Lord, and had only related his
anecdotes "as occasion required." If the tradition regarding Matthew, as
well as that regarding Mark, was derived from the Elder, he, too, as
well as Papias, knew the Greek Matthew; regarding it as a "translation"
of the apostolic _Logia_, he naturally makes Matthew the standard and
accounts as above for the wide divergence of Mark as to order.

The Jerusalem elder who thus differentiates the two great branches of
gospel tradition into Matthæan Precepts and Petrine Sayings and Doings,
is probably "the Elder John"; for this elder's "traditions" were so
copiously cited by Papias as to lead Irenæus, and after him Eusebius, to
the unwarranted inference of personal contact. Irenæus even identified
the Elder John with the Apostle, thus transporting not only him, but the
entire body of "Elders and disciples" from Jerusalem to Asia, a pregnant
misapprehension to which we must return later. In the meantime we must
note that this fundamental distinction between _syntagmas_ of the
Precepts, and narratives of the Sayings and Doings, carries us back as
far as it is possible to penetrate into the history of gospel
composition. The primitive work of the Apostle Matthew, was probably
done in and for Jerusalem and vicinity--certainly so if written in
Aramaic. The date, if early tradition may be believed, was "when Peter
and Paul were preaching and founding the church at Rome." Oral tradition
must have begun the process even earlier.[16] Mark's work was done at
Rome, according to internal evidence no less than by the unanimous voice
of early tradition. It dates from "after the death of Peter" (64-5)
according to ancient tradition. According to the internal evidence it
was written certainly not long before, and probably some few years
after, the overthrow of Jerusalem and the temple (70). At the time of
Papias' writing, then (_c._ 145), all four gospels were probably known,
though only Matthew and Mark were taken as authoritative because
(indirectly) apostolic. At the time of prosecution of his inquiries the
voice of (Palestinian) tradition was still "living and abiding." If, as
tenses and phraseology seem to imply, this means Aristion and the Elder
John (_ob._ 117?) it is reasonable to regard it as extending back over a
full generation. The original Matthew was even then (_c._ 100), and in
Palestine itself, a superseded book. It had three successors, if not
more, two Greek and one Aramaic, all still retaining their claim to the
name and authority of Matthew[17]; but all had been re-cast in a
narrative frame, which at least in the case of our canonical first
Gospel was borrowed from the Roman work of Mark. So far as the remaining
fragments of its rivals enable us to judge, the same is true in their
case also, though to a less extent. It is quite unmistakably true of
Luke, the gospel of Antioch, that its narrative represents the same
"memorabilia of Peter"; for so Mark's gospel came to be called. Thus the
Petrine story appears almost from the start to have gained undisputed
supremacy. But side by side with this remarkable fact as to gospel
_narrative_ is the equally notable confirmation of the other statements
of 'the Elders' regarding the Precepts. For all modern criticism
admits, that besides the material of Mark, which both Matthew and Luke
freely incorporate, omitting very little, our first and third
evangelists have embodied, in (usually) the same Greek translation but
in greatly varied order, large sections from one or more early
compilations of the Sayings of Jesus.

    Footnote 16: Some authorities of the first rank think there is
    evidence of literary dependence in 1st Cor. i. 18-21 on the Saying
    (Matt. xi. 25-27 = Lk. x. 21 f.).

    Footnote 17: The orthodox Aramaic _Gospel of the Nazarenes_ borrows
    from Luke as well as Matthew, but speaks in the name of "Matthew."
    This apostle was also regarded as author of the _Gospel according to
    the Hebrews_, a heretical product of _c._ 120, current in Greek
    among the Jewish Christians of Palestine (Ebionites).

It is indispensable to a historical appreciation of the environment out
of which any gospel has arisen that we realize that no community ever
produced and permanently adopted as its "gospel" a _partial_
presentation of the message of salvation. To its mind the writing must
have embodied, for the time at least, the message, the whole message,
and nothing but the message. Change of mind as to the essential contents
of the message would involve supplementation or alteration of the
written gospel employed. No writing of the kind would be produced with
tacit reference to some other for another aspect of the truth.

It was not, then, the mere limitation of its language which caused the
ancient Matthæan Sayings (the so-called _Logia_) to be superseded and
disappear; nor is mere "translation" the word to describe that which
took its place. The growth of Christianity in the Greek-speaking world
not only called upon Jerusalem to pour out its treasure of evangelic
tradition in the language of the empire, but stimulated a sense of its
own increasing need. That which could once be supplied by
eye-witnesses, the testimony of Jesus' mighty works, his death and
resurrection, was now fast disappearing. And simultaneously the
appreciation of its importance was growing. It was impossible to be
blind to the conquests made by the gospel _about_ Jesus. Enclosed in it,
as part of its substance the gospel _of_ Jesus found its final
resting-place, much as the mother church itself was later taken up and
incorporated in a catholic Christendom. So it is that in the Elder's
time the church of the 'apostles, elders and witnesses' have done more
than merely supersede their Aramaic(?) _Syntagma_ of the Precepts by
"translations." They had adopted alongside of it from Rome Mark's
"Memorabilia of Peter" as to "things either said or done by the Lord."
We can see indeed from the apologetic way in which 'the Elder' speaks of
Mark's limitations (Peter is not to be held responsible for the lack of
order) that Mark's authority is still held quite secondary to Matthew's;
but the very fact that his work is given authoritative standing at all,
still more the fact that it has become the framework into which the
old-time _syntagma_ has been set, marks a great and fundamental change
of view as to what constitutes "the gospel."

No mere _syntagma_ of the Precepts of Jesus has ever come down to us,
though the papyrus leaves of "Sayings of Jesus" discovered in 1897 at
Behneseh in Egypt by Grenfell and Hunt had something of this
character.[1] It was impossible that any community outside the most
primitive one, where personal "witnesses of the Lord" still survived
"until the times of Trajan," could be satisfied with a "gospel" which
gave only the precepts of Jesus without so much as an account of his
crucifixion and resurrection. And, strange as it may seem, the evidence
of Q (_i. e._ the coincident material in Matthew and Luke not derived
from Mark), as judged by nearly all critics, is that no narrative of the
kind was given in the early compilation of discourses from which this
element was mainly derived. After the "witnesses," apostolic and other,
had begun to disappear, a mere _syntagma_ of Jesus' sayings could not
suffice. It became inevitable that the precepts should be embodied in
the story. And yet we have at least two significant facts to corroborate
the intimations of ancient tradition that this combination was long
postponed. (18) When it is at last effected, and certainly in the
regions of southern Syria,[19] there is even there practically nothing
left of authentic _narrative_ material but the Petrine tradition as
compiled by Mark at Rome. Our Matthew, a Palestinian Jew, the only
writer of the New Testament who consistently uses the Hebrew Bible,
makes a theoretical reconstruction of the order of events in the
Galilean ministry, but otherwise he just incorporates Mark substantially
as it was. What he adds in the way of narrative is so meagre in amount,
and so manifestly inferior and apocryphal in character, as to prove the
extreme poverty of his resources of oral tradition of this type. Luke
has somewhat larger, and (as _literary_ products) better, narrative
additions than Matthew's; but the amount is still extremely meagre, and
often _historically_ of slight value. Some of it reappears in the
surviving fragments of the _Preaching of Peter_. To sum up, there is
outside of Mark _no_ considerable amount of historical material,
canonical or uncanonical, for the story of Jesus. This fact would be
hard to account for if in the regions where witnesses survived, the
first generation really took an interest in perpetuating narrative
tradition. (2) The _order_ of even such events as secured perpetuation
was already hopelessly lost at a time more remote than the writing of
our earliest gospel. This is true not only for Mark, as 'the Elder'
frankly confesses, but for Matthew, Luke and every one else.
Unchronological as Mark's order often is (and the tradition as to the
'casual anecdotes' agrees with the critical phenomena of the text), it
is vastly more historical than Matthew's reconstruction. On the other
hand Luke, while expressly undertaking to improve in this special
respect upon his predecessors, almost never ventures to depart from the
order of Mark, and when he does has never the support of Matthew, and
usually not that of real probability. In short, incorrect as they knew
the order of Mark to be, it was the best that could be had in the days
when evangelists began to go beyond the mere _syntagmas_, and to write
"gospels" as we understand them, or, in their own language, "the things
which Jesus began _both_ to do _and_ to teach" (Acts i. 1). From these
two great outstanding phenomena of gospel criticism alone it would be
apparent that the distinction dimly perceived in the tradition of the
Jerusalem elders reported by Papias, and indeed by many later writers,
is no illusion, but an important and vital fact.

    Footnote 18: It was superscribed "These are the ... words (_logoi_
    as in the Pastoral Epistles, not _logia_ as in Papias and Polycarp)
    which Jesus the living Lord spoke to the disciples and Thomas."

    Footnote 19: The possibility should be left open that the Greek
    Matthew was written in Egypt (cf. Matt. ii. 15), as some critics
    hold. From the point of view of the church historian, however, Egypt
    must really be classed as in "the regions of southern Syria." Its
    relations with Jerusalem were close and constant.

A third big, unexpected fact looms up as we round the capes of critical
analysis, subtracting from Matthew and Luke first the elements peculiar
to each, then that derived by each from Mark. It is a fact susceptible,
however, of various interpretation. To some it only proves either the
futility of criticism, or the worthlessness of ancient tradition. To us
it proves simply that the process of transition in Palestine, the home
of evangelic tradition, from the primitive _syntagma_ of Precepts,
framed on the plan of the Talmudic treatise known as _Pirke Aboth_, or
"Sayings of the Fathers," to the Greek type of narrative gospel, was a
longer and more complex one than has commonly been imagined. A cursory
statement of the results of critical efforts to reproduce the so-called
"second source" of Matthew and Luke (Mark being considered the first),
will serve to bring out the fact to which we refer, and at the same
time, we hope, to throw light upon the history of gospel development.

The mere process of subtraction above described to obtain the element Q
offers no serious difficulties, and for those who attach value to the
tradition of 'the Elders' it is natural to anticipate that the remainder
will show traits corresponding to the description of an apostolic
_syntagma_ of sayings of the Lord translated from the Aramaic, in short
the much-desired _Logia_ of Matthew. The actual result is disappointing
to such an expectation. The widely, though perhaps somewhat
thoughtlessly accepted equivalence Q = the _Logia_ is simply false. Q is
_not_ the _Logia_. It is not a _syntagma_, nor even a consistent whole,
and as it lay before our first and third evangelists it was not (for a
considerable part at least) in Aramaic. True, Q does consist _almost_
exclusively of discourse material, a large part of which has only
topical order, and is wholly, or mainly, destitute of narrative
connection. Also we find traces here and there of translation at some
period from the Aramaic, though not more in the Q element than in Mark.
But to those who looked for immediate confirmation of the tradition the
result has been on the whole disappointing. Some, more particularly
among English critics, have considered it to justify a falling back upon
the vaguer generalities of the once prevalent theory of oral tradition.
In reality we are simply called upon to renew the process of
discrimination. Most of the Q material has the saying-character and is
strung together with that lack of all save topical order which we look
for in a _syntagma_. But parts of it, such as the Healing of the
Centurion's servant (Matt. viii. 5-10, 13 = Luke vii. 1-10), or the
Preaching of the Baptist and Temptation Story (Matt. iii. 7-10, 12; iv.
2-11 = Luke iii. 7-9, 17; iv. 2-13), obstinately refuse to be brought
under this category. Moreover, the latter section has the unmistakable
motive of presenting Jesus _in his character and ministry_ as "the Son
of God," precisely as in Mark. It begins by introducing Jesus on the
stage at the baptism of John, after the ancient narrative outline (Acts
i. 22; x. 37 f.), and cannot be imagined as forming part of anything
else but a _narrative_ having the conclusion characteristic of our own
type of gospel. Other considerable sections of Q, such as the Question
of John's Disciples and Discourse of Jesus on those that were 'Stumbled'
in him (Matt. xi. 2-11, 16-27; Luke vii. 18-35; x. 13-22), share with
the Baptism and Temptation section not only the doctrinal motive of
commending Jesus in his person and ministry as the longed-for Son of
God, but in a number of characteristics which set them quite apart from
the general mass of precepts and parables in Q. We can here mention only
the following: (1) the coincidence in language between Matthew and Luke
is much greater in these sections of Q, often even greater than in the
sections borrowed from Mark, showing clearly the existence of a common
document written not in Aramaic, but in the Greek language. (2) This
material, unlike most of Q, has served as a source and model in many
portions of Mark. (3) It is for the most part not included in the five
great blocks into which Matthew has divided the Precepts by means of a
special concluding formula (vii. 28; xi. 1; xiii. 53; xix. 1, and xxvi.
1) but appears outside, in the form of supplements to the Markan
narrative (iii. 7--iv. 11; viii. 5-13, 18-22, xi. 2-27; xii. 38-45,
etc.). Finally (4) the Q material of this type seems to be given more
copiously by Luke than by Matthew, and with something more than mere
conjecture of his own as to its historical occasion. In fact, since it
appears that at least this element of Q was known to Mark, there is
nothing to justify exclusion from it of such material as the
Transfiguration story, though in this case it would be needful to prove
that Mark was not the source. Similarly it would be reasonable to think
of Luke's wide divergence from Mark in his story of the Passion as
occasioned by his preference for material derived from this source.
Only, since Matthew has preferred to follow Mark, we have no means of
determining whence Luke did derive his new and here often valuable
material.

The existence, then, of an element of Q which quite fails to correspond
to what we take the Matthæan _syntagma_ to have been by no means proves
either the futility of criticism or the worthlessness of the ancient
tradition. It only shows that our synoptic evangelists were not the
first to attempt the combination of discourse with narrative, but that
Luke at least had a predecessor in the field, to whom all are more or
less indebted. Criticism and tradition together show that there are two
great streams from which all historically trustworthy material has been
derived. The one is Evangelic Story, and is mainly derived from Mark's
outline of the ministry based on the anecdotes of Peter, though some
elements come from another source, principally preserved by Luke, which
we must discuss in a later chapter devoted to the growth of Petrine
story at Rome and Antioch. The other stream, "Words of the Lord," comes
from Jerusalem, and is always associated in all its forms with the name
of Matthew. We have every reason for accepting the statement that as
early as the founding of the church in Rome (45-50) the Apostle Matthew
had begun the work of compiling the Precepts of Jesus, in a form
serviceable to the object of "teaching men to observe all things
whatsoever he had commanded." Our present Gospel of Matthew, however, is
neither this work nor a translation of it; for the only three things
told us about the apostle's work are all irreconcilable with the
characteristics of our Matthew. The compilation of "Words of the Lord"
was (1) a _syntagma_ and not, like Mark, an outline of the ministry. It
was (2) written in Aramaic; whereas our Matthew is an original Greek
composition. It was (3) by an apostle who had personal acquaintance with
Jesus; whereas our first evangelist is to the last degree dependent upon
the confessedly defective story of Mark. Still if we take our Matthew as
the last link in the long chain of development, covering perhaps half a
century, and including such by-products as the _Gospel according to the
Hebrews_ and the _Gospel of the Nazarenes_, we may obtain a welcome
light upon the environment out of which has come down the work which an
able scholar justly declared, "the most important book ever written, the
Gospel according to Matthew."

The language in which it was written was alone sufficient to place the
Greek Matthew beyond all possible competition in the larger world from
Aramaic rivals. But its comprehensiveness and catholicity still further
helped it to the position which it soon attained as the most widely used
of all the gospels. Matthew is not only in its whole structure a
composite gospel, but shows in high degree the catholicizing tendency of
the times. Just as it frankly adopts the Roman-Petrine narrative of Mark
with slightest possible modification, so also it places in Peter's hand
with equal frankness the primacy in apostolic succession. Almost the
only additions it makes to Mark's account of the public ministry are the
story of Peter's walking on the sea (xiv. 28-33), and his payment of the
temple tribute for Christ and himself with the coin from the fish's
mouth (xvii. 24-27). The latter story introduces the chapter on the
exercise of rulership in "the church" (ch. xviii.), beginning with the
disciples' question: "Who _then_ is greatest in the kingdom?" Peter is
again in it the one salient figure (xviii. 21). An equally important
addition, connected with xviii. 17 f. is the famous committal to Peter
of the power of the keys, with the declaration making him for his
confession the 'Rock' foundation of "the church." This addition to
Mark's story of the rebuke of Peter at Cæsarea Philippi, is one which
decidedly alters its bearing, and seems even to borrow the very language
of Gal. i. 16 f. in order to exalt the apostleship of Peter. In fact,
the Roman gospel and the Palestinian almost reverse the rôles we should
expect Peter to play in each. Matthew alone makes Peter "the first" (x.
2), while Mark seems to take special pains to record rebukes of the
twelve and the brethren of the Lord, and especially the rebukes called
down upon themselves by Peter, or Peter and John.

In respect to the primacy of Peter we can observe a certain difference
even among the Palestinian gospels which succeeded to the primitive
_syntagma_ of Matthew. Little, indeed, is known of the orthodox _Gospel
of the Nazarenes_, beyond its relatively late and composite character;
for it borrowed from Matthew, Mark and Luke in turn. Its list of
apostles, however, begins with "John and James the sons of Zebedee,"
_then_ "Simon and Andrew," and winds up: "Thee also, Matthew, did I
call, as thou wert sitting at the seat of custom, and thou followedst
me." The anti-Pauline _Gospel according to the Hebrews_ shows its
conception of the seat of apostolic authority by giving to "James the
Just" the place of Peter as recipient of that first manifestation of the
risen Lord, which laid the foundation of the faith. Why then does the
Greek Palestinian gospel, in contrast with its rivals, lay such special
stress on the primacy of Peter?

From the cautious and (as it were) deprecatory tone of the appendix to
John (John xxi.) in seeking to commend the "other disciple whom Jesus
loved" as worthy to be accepted as a "true witness" without detriment to
the acknowledged authority of Peter as chief under-shepherd of the
flock, we may infer that not at Rome alone, but wherever there was
question of 'apostolic' tradition, the authority of Peter was coming
rapidly to the fore. The tendency at Antioch is even more marked than at
Rome, as is manifest from Acts. If, then, it seems stronger still in a
region where we should expect the authority of James to be put forward,
this need not be taken as a specifically Roman trait. We must realize
the sharp antagonism which existed in Palestine from the time of the
Apostolic council down, between (1) the consistent legalists, who
maintained down to the period of Justin (153) and the _Clementine
Homilies and Recognitions_ (180-200), their bitter hostility to Paul and
his gospel of Gentile freedom from the Law; and (2) the 'catholic,' or
liberal, Jewish-Christians, who took the standpoint of the Pillars. It
is but one of many indications of its 'catholic' tendency that our
Matthew increases the emphasis on the apostolic authority of Peter to
the point of an actual primacy. The phenomenon must be judged in the
light of the disappearance or suppression of all evangelic story save
what came under the name of Peter, and the tendency in Acts to bring
under his name even the entire apostleship to the Gentiles. Peter is not
yet in these early writings the representative of Rome, but of
_catholicity_. The issue in Matthew is not as between Rome and some
other dominant see, but (as the reflection of the language of Gal. i.
17 f. in Matt. xvi. 17 shows) as between 'catholic' apostolic
authority and the unsafe tendencies of Pauline independence.

Nevertheless, for all his leanings to catholicity the Greek Matthew has
not wholly succeeded in excluding materials which still reflect
Jewish-Christian hostility to Paul, or at least to the tendencies of
Pauline Christianity. Over and over again special additions are made in
Matthew to emphasize a warning against the workers of "lawlessness." The
exhortation of Jesus in Luke vi. 42-45 to effect (self-)reformation not
on the surface, nor in word, but by change of the inward root of
disposition fructifying in deeds, is altered in Matt. vii. 15-22 into a
warning against the "false prophets" who work "lawlessness," and who
must be judged by their fruits. They make the confession of Lordship
(_cf._ Rom. x. 9) but are not obedient to Jesus' commandment, and lack
good works. In particular the test of Mark ix. 38-40 is directly
reversed. The principle "Whosoever is not against us is for us" is not
to be trusted. A teacher may exercise the 'spiritual gifts' of prophecy,
exorcism, and miracles wrought in the name of Jesus, and still be a
reprobate. A similar (and most incongruous) addition is made to Mark's
parable of the Patient Husbandman (Mark iv. 26-29), in Matt. xiii.
24-30, and reiterated in a specially appended "interpretation" (xiii.
36-43). This addition likens the "workers of lawlessness" to tares sown
alongside the good seed of the word by "an enemy." A similar incongruous
attachment is made to the parable of the Marriage feast (Matt. xxii.
1-14; _cf._ Luke xiv. 15-24) to warn against the lack of the 'garment of
good works.' Finally, Matthew closes his whole series of the discourses
of Jesus with a group of three parables developed with great elaboration
and rhetorical effect, out of relatively slight suggestions as found
elsewhere. The sole theme of the series is the indispensableness of good
works in the judgment (Matt. 25; _cf._ Luke xii. 35-38; xix. 11-28, and
Mark ix. 37, 41). A similar interest appears in Matthew's insistence on
the permanent obligation of the Law (v. (16) 17-20; xix. 16-22--in
contrast with Mark x. 17-22), on respect for the temple (xvii. 24-27)
and on the Davidic descent of Jesus, with fulfilment of messianic
promise in him (chh. i.-ii.; ix. 27). He limits the activity of Jesus to
the Holy Land (xv. 22; contrast Mark vii. 24 f.), makes him in sending
forth the Twelve (x. 5 f.) specifically forbid mission work among
Samaritans or Gentiles, and while the prohibition is finally removed in
xxviii. 18-20, the apostolic seat cannot be removed, but remains as in
x. 23, among "the cities of Israel" to the end of the world.

There is probably no more of intentional opposition to Paul or to his
gospel in all this than in James or Luke. We cannot for example regard
it as more than accidental coincidence that in the phrase "an enemy hath
done this," in the parable of the tares, we have the same epithet which
the Ebionite literature applies to Paul. But enough remains to indicate
how strongly Jewish-Christian prejudices and limitations still affected
our evangelist. With respect to date, the atmosphere is in all respects
such as characterizes the period of the nineties.

It does not belong to our present purpose to analyze this gospel into
its constituent elements. The process can be followed in many treatises
on gospel criticism, and the results will be found summarized in
_Introductions_ to the New Testament such as the recent scholarly work
of Moffatt. We have here but to note the general character and structure
of the book as revealing the main outlines of its history and the
conditions which gave it birth.

Matthew and Luke are alike in that both represent comparatively late
attempts to combine the ancient Matthæan _syntagma_ with the
'Memorabilia of Peter' compiled by Mark. But there is a great
difference. Luke contemplates his work with some of the motives of the
historian. He adopts the method of narrative, and therefore subordinates
his discourse material to a conception (often confused enough) of
sequence in space and time. Matthew, as the structure of his gospel, no
less than his own avowal shows, had an aim more nearly corresponding to
the ancient Palestinian type. The demand for the narrative form had
become irresistible. It controlled even his later Greek and Aramaic
rivals. But Matthew has subordinated the historical to the ethical
motive. He aims at, and has rendered, just the service which his age
demanded and for which it could look to no other region than Jerusalem,
a full compilation of the commandments and precepts of Jesus.

The narrative framework is adopted from Mark without serious alteration,
because this work had already proved its effectiveness in convincing men
everywhere that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of God." Like Luke,
Matthew prefixes an account of Jesus' miraculous birth and childhood,
because in his time (_c._ 90) the ancient "beginning of the gospel" with
the baptism by John had given opportunity to the heresy of the
Adoptionists, represented by Cerinthus, who maintained that Jesus
_became_ the Son of God at his baptism, a merely temporary "receptacle"
of the Spirit. The prefixed chapters have no incarnation doctrine, and
no doctrine of pre-existence. They do not intend in their story of the
miraculous birth to relate the incoming of a superhuman or non-human
being into the world, else they could not take up the pedigree of Joseph
as exhibiting Jesus' title to the throne of David. Miracle attends and
signalizes the birth of that "Son of David" who is destined to become
the Son of God. Apart from the mere question of attendant prodigy the
aim of Matthew's story of the Infancy is such as should command the
respect and sympathy of every rational thinker. Against all Doketic
dualism it maintains that the Son of God is such from birth to death.
The presence of God's Spirit with him is not a mere counterpart to
demonic "possession," but is part of his nature as true man from the
beginning.

But the doctrinal interest of Matthew scarcely goes beyond the point of
proving that Jesus is the Christ foretold by the prophets. Doctrine as
well as history is subordinate to the one great aim of teaching men to
"observe all things whatsoever Jesus commanded."




CHAPTER VII

THE PETRINE TRADITION. EVANGELIC STORY


Of the extent to which the early church could do without narrative of
Jesus' earthly ministry we have extraordinary evidences in the
literature of Pauline Christianity on the one side and of Jewish
Christianity on the other. For Paul himself, as we know, the real story
of Jesus was a transcendental drama of the Incarnation, Redemption, and
Exaltation. It is probable that when at last "three years" after his
conversion he went up to Jerusalem "to get acquainted with Peter," the
story he was interested to hear had even then more to do with that
common apostolic witness of the resurrection appearances reproduced in
1st Cor. xv. 3-11, than with the sayings and doings of the ministry. As
to this Paul preserves, as we have seen, an almost unbroken silence. And
that which did not interest Paul, naturally did not interest his
churches.

On the other hand those who could have perpetuated a full and authentic
account of the ministry were almost incredibly slow to undertake the
task; partly, no doubt, because of their vivid expectation of the
immediate end of the world, but largely also because to their mind the
data most in need of preservation were the 'life-giving words.' The
impression of Jesus' character, his person and authority was not, as
they regarded it, a thing to be gained from the historical outline of
his career. It was established by the fact of the Resurrection, by the
predictions of the prophets, which found fulfilment in the circumstances
of Jesus' birth, particular incidents here and there in his career and
fate, but most of all in his resurrection and the gifts of the Spirit
which argued his present session at the right hand of God. Once this
authority of Jesus was established the believer had only to observe his
commandments as handed down by the apostles, elders and witnesses.

On all sides there was an indifference to such historical inquiry as the
modern man would think natural and inevitable, an indifference that must
remain altogether inexplicable to us unless we realize that until at
least the time of the fourth evangelist the main proofs of messiahship
were not looked for in Jesus' earthly career. His Christhood was thought
of as something in the future, not yet realized. Even his resurrection
and manifestation in glory "at the right hand of God," which is to both
Paul (Rom. i. 4) and his predecessors (Acts ii. 32-36) the assurance
that "God hath made him both Lord and Christ," is not yet the beginning
of his specific messianic programme. Potentially this has begun, because
Jesus has already been seated on the 'throne of glory,' "from henceforth
expecting until his enemies be made the footstool of his feet."
Practically it is not yet. The Christ is still a Christ that is to be.
His messianic rule is delayed until the subjugation of the "enemies";
and this subjugation in turn is delayed by "the long suffering of God,
who willeth not that any should perish, but that all men should come to
repentance." Meantime a special "outpouring of the Spirit" is given in
'tongues,' 'prophecies,' 'miracle working,' and the like, in fulfilment
of scriptural promise, as a kind of coronation largess to all loyal
subjects. This outpouring of the Spirit, then, is the great proof and
assurance that the Heir has really ascended the 'throne of glory' in
spite of the continuance of "all things as they were from the foundation
of the world." These 'gifts' are "firstfruits of the Spirit," pledges of
the ultimate inheritance, proofs both to believers and unbelievers of
the complete Inheritance soon to be received. But the gifts have also a
practical aspect. They are all endowments for _service_. The Great
Repentance in Israel and among the Gentiles is not to be brought about
without the co-operation of believers. The question which at once arises
when the manifestation of the risen Christ is granted, "Lord, dost thou
at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?" is therefore answered by
the assurance that the time is in God's hand alone, but that the 'gifts
of the Spirit,' soon to be imparted, are intended to enable believers to
do their part, at home and abroad, toward effecting the Great Repentance
(Acts i. 6-8).[20]

    Footnote 20: The parallel in Mark xvi. 14-18 is very instructive,
    but needs the recently discovered connection between verses 14 and
    15 to complete the sense: "And they excused themselves (for their
    unbelief) saying, This age of lawlessness and unbelief is under the
    dominion of Satan, who by means of the unclean spirits prevents the
    truth and power of God from being apprehended. On this account
    reveal thy righteousness (_i. e._ justice, in the sense of Isa. lvi,
    1 _b_) even now. And Christ replied to them, The limit of years of
    Satan's power is (already) fulfilled, but other terrible things are
    at hand; moreover I was delivered up to death on behalf of sinners
    in order that they might return unto the truth and sin no more, that
    they might inherit the spiritual and incorruptible glory which is in
    heaven." Then follows the mission into all the world and endowment
    with the gifts.

For a church which felt itself endowed with living and present evidences
of the messianic power of Jesus it was naturally only a second thought
(and not a very early one at that) to look back for proof to occurrences
in Jesus' life in Galilee, however notable his career as "a prophet
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people." The _present_
gifts of his power would be (at least in demonstrative effect) "greater
works than these." With those who had the resurrection testimony of 1st
Cor. xv. 3-11, and even the recurrent experience of "visions and
revelations of the Lord," anticipatory revelations of his messiahship,
utterances, like that to Peter at Cæsarea Philippi, wherein Jesus only
predicted the great work to be divinely accomplished through him,
whether by life or death, in going up to Jerusalem, intimations which
had been disregarded or disbelieved at the time, could not rank with
present knowledge, experience and insight. They would be recalled merely
as confirmatory foregleams of "the true light that now shineth," as the
two who had received the manifestation at Emmaus exclaim, "Did not our
heart burn within us while he talked to us in the way?"

We could not indeed psychologically account for the development of the
resurrection faith after the crucifixion, if before it Jesus' life and
utterances had not been such as to make his manifestation in glory seem
to the disciples just what they _ought_ to have expected. But,
conversely, nothing is more certain than the fact that they _did not_
expect it; and that when the belief had become established by other
means, the attitude toward the "sayings and doings" maintained by those
who had them to relate--as we know, the most successful missionary of
all felt it no handicap to be entirely without them--was one of looking
back into an obscure past for things whose pregnant significance became
appreciable only in the light of present knowledge. "These things
understood not his disciples at the first, but when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things had been written of him, and that
they had done these things unto him."

We are fortunate in having even one example of the "consecutive
narratives" (_diegeses_) referred to in Luke i. 1. Our Mark is a gospel
written purely and simply from this point of view, aiming only to show
how the earthly career of Jesus gave evidence that this was the Son of
God, predestined to exaltation to the right hand of power, with little
attempt, if any, to bring in the precepts of the New Law. We should
realize, however, that this is already a beginning in the process soon
to become controlling, a process of carrying back into the earthly life
of Jesus in Galilee of first this trait, then that, then all the
attributes of the glorified Lord.

Ancient and reliable tradition informs us that this first endeavour to
tell the story of "Jesus Christ the Son of God" was composed at Rome by
John Mark, a former companion of both Peter and Paul, from data drawn
from the anecdotes casually employed by Peter in his preaching. There is
much to confirm this in the structure, the style, and the doctrinal
object and standpoint of the Gospel.

To begin with, the date of composition cannot be far from 75. Mark is
not only presupposed by both Matthew and Luke, but in their time had
already acquired an extraordinary predominance. To judge by what
remains to us of similar products, Mark in its own field might almost be
said to reign supreme and reign alone. Such almost exclusive supremacy
could not have been attained, even by a writing commonly understood to
represent the preaching of Peter, short of a decade or more of years. On
the other hand we have the reluctant testimony of antiquity, anxious to
claim as much as possible of apostolic authority for the record, but
unwilling to commit Peter to apparent contradictions of Matthew, that it
was written after Peter's death (64-5).[21] Internal evidence would in
fact bring down the date of the work in its present form a full decade
thereafter. It is true that there are many structural evidences of more
than one form of the narrative, and that the apocalyptic chapter (ch.
xiii.), which furnishes most of the evidence of date, may well belong
among the later supplements. But in the judgment of most critics this
'eschatological discourse' (almost the only connected discourse of the
Gospel) is clearly framed in real retrospect upon the overthrow of
Jerusalem and the temple, and the attendant tribulation on "those that
are in Judæa." The writer applies a general saying of Jesus known to us
from other sources about destroying and rebuilding the temple
specifically to the demolition effected by Titus (70). He warns his
readers in the same connection that "the end" is not to follow
immediately upon the great Judæan war, but only when the powers of evil
in the heavenly places, powers inhabiting sun, moon and stars, are
shaken (xiii. 21-27). The Pauline doctrine of 2nd Thess. ii. 1-12 is
adopted, but with careful avoidance of the prediction that the "man of
sin" is to appear "in the temple of God." Paul's "man of sin" is now
identified with Daniel's "abomination that maketh desolate" (Dan. xii.
11), which therefore is spoken of as "he" (masculine). "His" appearance
will prelude the great Judæan tribulation; but his standing place is
ill-defined. It is only "where he ought not." Matthew (following his
usual practice) returns more nearly to the language of Daniel. With him
the "Abomination" is again an object standing "in _a_ holy place." But
Matthew is already applying the prophecy to another tribulation still to
come. He does not see that Mark refers to the sack of Jerusalem on which
he himself looks back in his addition to the parable of the Supper
(Matt. xxii. 6 f.; _cf._ Luke xiv. 15-24), but takes Mark xiii. 14-23
as Jesus' prediction of a great final tribulation _still to come_.

    Footnote 21: So Irenæus (186) and (by implication) Papias. Clement
    of Alexandria (210) meets the difficulty by alleging that Peter was
    still alive, but gave no aid to the writer.

Mark's crudities of language and style, his frequent latinisms, his
explanation to his readers (almost contemptuously exaggerated) of Jewish
purifications and distinctions of meats (vii. 3 f.), presupposition
of the Roman form of divorce (x. 12), explanation in Roman money of the
value of the (Greek and Oriental) "mite" (_lepton_), are well-known
confirmations of the tradition of the writing's place of origin. But
these are superficial characteristics. More important for us to note is
the fundamental conception of what constitutes "the gospel," and the
writer's attitude on questions of the relation of Jew and Gentile and
the authority of the apostles and kindred of the Lord.

The most striking characteristic of Mark is that it aims to present the
gospel _about_ Jesus, and is relatively indifferent to the gospel _of_
Jesus. Had the writer conceived his task after the manner of a Matthew
there is little doubt that he could have compiled catechetic discourses
of Jesus like the Sermon on the Mount or the discourse on prayer of Luke
xi. 1-13. The fact that he disregards such records of Jesus' ethical and
religious instruction does not mean that he (tacitly) refers his readers
to the Matthæan Precepts, or similar compilations, to supplement his own
deficiencies. It means a different, more Pauline, conception of what
"the gospel" is. Mark conceives its primary element to be attachment to
the _person_ of Jesus, and has already gone far toward obliterating the
primitive distinction between a Jesus whose earthly career had been "in
great humility," and the glorified Son of God. The earthly Jesus is
still, it is true, only a man endowed with the Spirit of Adoption. But
he is so completely "in" the Spirit, and so fully endowed with it, as
almost to assume the Greek figure of a demi-god treading the earth
incognito. No wonder this Gospel became the favourite of the
Adoptionists and Doketists.

Mark does not leave his reader in the dark as to what a man must do to
inherit eternal life. The requirement does not appear until after Jesus
has taken up with the twelve the road to Calvary, because it is
distinctly _not_ a keeping of commandments, new or old. It is an
adoption of "the mind that was in Christ, who humbled himself and became
obedient unto death." In Matthew's 'improved' version of Jesus' answer
to the rich applicant for eternal life, the suppliant is told he may
obtain it by obeying the commandments, with supererogatory merit ("if
thou wouldest be perfect"), if he follows Jesus' example of
self-abnegating service. In the form and context from which Matthew
borrows (Mark x. 13-45) there is no trace of this legalism, and the
whole idea of supererogatory merit, or higher reward, is strenuously,
almost indignantly, repudiated. No man can receive the kingdom at all
who does not receive it "as a little child." Every man must be prepared
to make every sacrifice, even if he has kept all the commandments from
his youth up. Peter and the disciples who have "left all and followed"
are in respect to reward on the same level as others. Peter's plea for
the twelve is answered, "There is no man that hath left" earthly
possessions for Christ's sake that is not amply compensated even here.
He must expect persecution now, but will receive eternal life hereafter.
Only "many that are first shall be last, and last first." Even the
martyr-apostles James and John will have no superior rights in the
Kingdom.

Such passages as the above not only reveal why Mark's gospel shows
comparative disregard of the Precepts, but also displays an attitude
toward the growing claims of apostolic authority and neo-legalism which
in contrast with Matthew and Luke is altogether refreshing. The kindred
of the Lord appear but twice (iii. 20 f., 31-35 and vi. 1-6), both
times in a wholly unfavourable light. John appears but once, and that to
receive a rebuke for intolerance. James and John appear only to be
rebuked for selfish ambition. Peter seldom otherwise than for rebuke.
All the disciples show constantly the blindness and "hardness of heart"
which is explicitly said to characterize their nation (vi. 52; vii. 18;
viii. 12, 14-21). Their self-seeking and unfaithfulness is the foil to
Jesus' self-denial and faithfulness (viii. 33; ix. 6, 18 f., 29; x.
24, 28, 32, 37, 41; xiv. 27-31, 37-41, 50, 66-72). That which in Matthew
(xvi. 16-19) has become a special divine revelation to Peter of the
messiahship, marking the foundation of the church, is in the earlier
Markan form (Mark viii. 27-33) not a revelation of the messiahship at
all. Peter's answer, "Thou are the Christ," is common knowledge. The
twelve are not supposed to be more ignorant than the demons! There is,
however, a caustic rebuke of Peter for his carnal, Jewish idea of the
implications of Christhood. A revelation of its significance almost
Doketic in character is indeed granted just after to "Peter, James and
John"; but they remain without appreciation or understanding of the
'vision,' though it exhibits Jesus in his heavenly glory in company with
the translated heroes of the Old Testament. The revelation still
remains, therefore, a sealed book until "after the resurrection."

This exaggeration of the disciples' obtuseness is partly due, no doubt,
to apologetic motives. The evangelist has to meet the objection, If
Jesus was really the extraordinary, superhuman being represented, and
was openly proclaimed such by the evil spirits, why was nothing heard of
his claims until after the crucifixion and alleged resurrection? His
carrying back into the Galilean ministry of the glorified Being of
Paul's redemption doctrine compels him to represent the twelve as
sharing the dullness of the people who "having eyes see not, and having
ears hear not." But with all allowance for this, the Roman Gospel shows
small consideration for the apostles and kindred of the Lord.

It shows quite as little for Jewish prerogative and Jewish law. Jesus
speaks in parables because to those "without" his preaching is to be
intentionally a 'veiled' gospel (iv. 1-34). The Inheritance will be
taken away from them and given to others (xii. 1-12). Priests and people
together were guilty of the rejection and murder of Jesus (xv. 11-15,
29-32). Forgiveness of sins is offered by Jesus on his own authority in
defiance of the scribes. Their exclusion of the publicans and sinners he
disregards, proclaims abolition of their fasts, and holds their
sabbath-keeping up to scorn (ii. 1--iii. 6). On the question of
distinctions of meats his position is the most radical possible. The
Jewish ceremonial is a "vain worship," mere "commandments of men."
Defilement cannot be contracted by what "goes into a man." Jesus' saying
about inward purity was not aimed at the mere 'hedge of the Law' (Matt.
xv. 13), nor the mere matter of ablutions (Matt. xv. 20), but was
intended to "make all meats clean" (vii. 1-23). Moses' law in some of
its enactments does not represent the real divine will, but a human
accommodation to human weakness (x. 2-9). Obedience to its highest code
does not ensure eternal life (x. 19-21). The single law of love is "much
more than all whole burnt offering and sacrifices" (xii. 28-34). When
_all_ the references to Judaism, its Law, its institutions, and its
prerogative, are of this character, when Jesus _always_ appears in
radical opposition to the Law and its exponents (xii. 38-40; xiii. 1
f.), _never_ as their supporter in any degree, the evangelist comes
near to making it too hard for us to believe that he really was of
Jewish birth.

On the other hand we cannot doubt the statement that he derives his
anecdotes, however indirectly, from the preaching of Peter. The prologue
(i. 1-13), indeed, makes no pretence of reporting the testimony of any
witness, but acquaints the reader with the true nature of Jesus as "the
Christ, the Son of God" by means of a mystical account of his baptism
and endowment with the Spirit of Adoption, probably resting upon that
document of Q, which we have distinguished from the Precepts. But the
ensuing story of the ministry opens at the home of Peter in Capernaum,
and continues more or less connected therewith in spite of interjected
groups of anecdotes whose connection is not chronological but topical,
such as ii. 1--iii. 6; iii. 22-30; iv. 1-34. It reaches its climax where
Jesus at Cæsarea Philippi takes Peter into his confidence. Here again
the mystical Revelation or Transfiguration vision (ix. 2-10) interrupts
the connection, and shows its foreign derivation by the transcendental
sense in which it interprets the person of Jesus. Certain features
suggest its having been taken from the same source as the prologue (i.
1-13).

The story issues in the tragedy at Jerusalem, where, as before, Peter's
figure, however unfavourable the contrast in which it is set to that of
Jesus, is still the salient one. The outline in general is identical
with that so briefly sketched in Acts x. 38-42--_except_ that the
absolutely essential point, the one thing which no gospel narrative can
possibly have lacked, the resurrection manifestation to the disciples,
and the commission to preach the gospel, is absolutely lacking!

That Mark's gospel once contained such a conclusion is almost a
certainty. Imagine a gospel narrative without a report of the
manifestation of the risen Lord to his disciples! Imagine a church--and
that the church at _Rome_--giving out as the first, the authentic,
original, and (in intention) the only account of the origin of the
Christian faith (Mark i. 1), a narrative which _ended_ with the apostles
scattered in cowardly desertion, and Peter the most conspicuous, most
remorseful renegade of them all! He who writes in Peter's name from Rome
but shortly after, affectionately naming Mark "my son," must have had
indeed a forgiving spirit. But traces of the real sequel have not all
disappeared. Many outside allusions still remain to the turning again of
Peter and stablishing of his brethren in the resurrection faith. The
earliest is Paul's (1st Cor. xv. 5). The present Mark itself implies
that it once had such an ending; for Jesus promises to rally his flock
in Galilee after he is raised up (xiv. 28), and the women at the
sepulchre are bidden to remind the disciples of the promise, though
they fail to deliver their message. Indeed the whole Gospel looks
forward to it. To this end "the mystery of the kingdom" is given to the
chosen twelve (iii. 13 f., 31-35; iv. 10-12); for this they are
forewarned (though vainly) of the catastrophe (viii. 34--ix. 1, 30-32;
x. 32-34; xiv. 27-31). In fact the promise of a baptism of the Spirit
(i. 8) probably implies that the original sequel related not only the
appearance to Peter and (later) to the rest with the charge to preach,
but also their endowment with the gifts, perhaps as in John xx. 19-23.
What we now have is only a substitute for this original sequel, a
substitute so ill-fitting as to have provoked repeated attempts at
improvement.

From xvi. 8 onwards, as is well known, the oldest textual authorities
have simply a blank. Later authorities give a shorter or longer
substitute for the missing Manifestation and Charge to the twelve. The
shorter follows Matthew, the longer follows Luke, with traces of
acquaintance with John. Fanciful theories to explain these textual
phenomena, such as accidental mutilation of the only copy, are
improbable, and do not explain. If conjecture be permissible it is more
likely that the original work was in two parts, after the manner of
Luke-Acts, the 'former treatise' ending with the centurion's testimony,
"Truly this man was a Son of God" (xv. 39). The second part continued
the narrative in the form of a Preaching of Peter, perhaps ending with
his coming to Rome; for the ancient literature of the church had several
narratives of this type. Its disappearance will have been due to the
superseding (perhaps the embodiment) of it by the work of Luke. When the
primitive Markan 'former treatise' was adapted for separate use as a
gospel it was quite natural that it should be supplemented (we can
hardly say "completed") by the addition of the story of the Empty
Sepulchre (xv. 40--xvi. 8), though this narrative is quite unknown to
the primitive resurrection preaching (_cf._ 1st Cor. xv. 3-11), and one
in which every character save Pilate is a complete stranger to the body
of the work. The subsequent further additions of the so-called "longer"
and "shorter" endings belong to the history of transcription after A.D.
140.

It will be apparent from the above that the Gospel of Mark is no
exception to the rule that church-writings of this type inevitably
undergo recasting and supplementation until the advancing process of
canonization at last fixes their text with unalterable rigidity. Whether
we recognize "sources," or earlier "forms," or only earlier "editions"
of Mark, it is certain that appendices could still be attached long
after the appearance of Luke, and probable that in the early period of
its purely local currency at Rome the fund of Petrine anecdote had
received more than one adaptation of form before it was carried to
Syria and embodied substantially as we now have it in the composite
gospels of Matthew and Luke. The omission by Luke of Mark vi. 45--viii.
26 is intentional,[22] and cannot be used to prove the existence of a
shorter form; and the same is probably true of the omission of Mark ix.
38-40 by Matthew. Mark xii. 41-44, however, is probably an addition
later than Matthew's time. Neither Matthew nor Luke had a text extending
beyond xvi. 8. But signs of acquaintance with the original sequel appear
in the appendix to John (John xxi.) and in the late and composite
_Gospel of Peter_ (_c._ 140). According to the latter the twelve
remained in Jerusalem scattered and in hiding for the remaining six days
of the feast. At its close they departed, mourning and grieving, each
man to his own home. Peter and a few others, including "Levi the son of
Alpheus," resumed their fishing "on the sea." ... The fragment breaks
off at this point. The story may be conjecturally completed from 1st
Cor. xv. 5-8, with comparison of John xxi. 1-13; Luke v. 4-8; xxii. 31
f.; xxiv. 34, 36-43.

    Footnote 22: See below.

As we look back upon the undertaking of this humble author, named only
by tradition, one among the catechists of the great church of Paul and
Peter, writing but a few years after their death, but a few years before
1st Peter and Hebrews, one is struck by the grandeur of his aim. It is
true he was not wholly without predecessors in the field. The work
which afforded him at least the substance of his prologue, and in all
probability other considerable sections of his book, had already aimed
in a more mystical way to connect the Pauline doctrine of Christ as the
Wisdom of God with the mighty works and teachings of Jesus. Duplication
of a considerable part of Mark's story (vii. 31--viii. 26 repeats with
some variation vi. 30--vii. 30) shows that his work was one of
combination as well as creation. But outline, proportion and onward
march of the story show not only skill and care, but large-minded and
consistent adherence to the fundamental plan to tell the origin of the
Christian faith (Mark i. 1).

Confirmation of the belief and practice of the church--it is for this
that Mark reports all he can learn of the years of obscurity in Galilee
followed by the tragedy in Jerusalem. Not only belief in Jesus as the
Son of God will be justified by the story, but the founding,
institutions, and ritual of the existing church. He manifestly adapts it
to show not only the superhuman powers and attributes of the chosen Son
of God, but the germ and type of all the church's institutions. Its
baptism of repentance and accompanying gift of the Spirit of Adoption
only repeats the experience of Jesus at the baptism of John. Endowment
with the word of wisdom and the word of power is but the counterpart of
Jesus' divine equipment with "the power of the Spirit" when he taught
and healed in Galilee. The Sending of the Twelve sets the standard for
the church's evangelists and missionaries, just as the Breaking of the
Bread in Galilee gives the model for its fraternal banquet. So for the
Judæan ministry as well. The path of martyrdom is that which all must
follow, its Passover Supper of the Lord and Vigil in Gethsemane are
models for the church's annual observance, its Passover of the Lord, its
Vigil, its Resurrection feast. The grouping of the anecdotes is not all
of Mark's doing, for we can still see in many cases how they have grown
up around the church observances, to explain and justify the rites,
rather than to form part of an outlined career. But taking the work as a
whole, and considering how far beyond that of any other church was the
opportunity at Rome, where Paul had transmitted the lofty conception of
the Son of God, and Peter the concrete tradition of his earthly life, we
cannot wonder that Mark's outline so soon became the standard account of
Jesus' earthly ministry, and ultimately the only one.

But little space remains in which to trace the developments of gospel
story in other fields. Southern Syria and Egypt soon found it needful,
as we have seen, to adopt the work of Mark, but independently and as a
framework for the Matthæan Precepts. It cannot have been long after that
Antioch and Northern Syria followed suit. For Luke, though acquainted
with the work of 'many' predecessors gives no sure evidence of
acquaintance with Matthew. When we find such unsoftened contradictions
as those displayed between these two Greek gospels in their opening and
closing chapters, and observe, moreover, that while both indulge in
hundreds of corrections and improvements upon Mark, these are rarely
coincident and never make the assumption of interdependence necessary,
it is hard to resist the conclusion that neither evangelist was directly
acquainted with the other's work. Now no other gospel compares with
Matthew in the rapidity and extent of its circulation, while Luke
declares himself a diligent inquirer. He could not ignore the claims of
apostolic authority to which this early and wide acceptance of Matthew
were mainly due. The inference is reasonable that Luke's date was but
little later than that of Matthew. If the probability of his employment
of the _Antiquities_ of Josephus could be raised to a certainty this
would suffice to date the Gospel and Book of Acts not earlier than 96.
Internal and external evidence, as judged by most scholars, converge on
a date approximating 100.

The North-Syrian derivation of Luke-Acts is less firmly established in
tradition than the Roman origin of Mark and the South-Syrian of Matthew.
Ancient tradition can point to nothing weightier than the statement of
Eusebius, drawn we know not whence, but independently made in the
argumenta (prefixed descriptions) of several Vulgate manuscripts that
Luke was of Antiochian birth. However, internal evidence supplies
corroboration in rather unusual degree. If the reading of some texts in
Acts xi. 28, "And as we were assembled," could be accepted, this alone
would be almost conclusive corroboration. But dubious as it is, it
furnishes support. For if an alteration of the original, it is at any
rate extremely early (_c._ 150?) and aimed to support the belief in
question.[23] Moreover the whole attitude of Luke-Acts in respect to
apostolic authority, settlement of the great question of the terms of
fellowship between Jew and Gentile, and description of the founding of
the Pauline churches, is such as to make its origin anywhere between the
Taurus range and the Adriatic most improbable; while if we place it in
Rome we shall have an insoluble problem in the relation of its extreme
emphasis on apostolic authority, and quasi-deification of Peter, to the
stalwart independence of Mark. Conversely there are many individual
traits which suggest Antioch as the place of origin. Next to Jerusalem,
the never-to-be-forgotten church of "the apostles and elders," Antioch
is the mother church of Christendom. There the name "Christian" had its
origin. There the work of converting the Gentiles was begun. The Greek
churches of Cyprus and Asia Minor are regarded as dependencies of
Antioch. Even those of the Greek peninsula are linked as well as may be
to Antioch and Jerusalem, with suppression of the story of the schism.
Antioch, not the Pauline Greek churches, is the benefactress of "the
poor saints in Jerusalem," and at the instance of Antioch, by appeal to
"the apostles and elders," the "decrees" are obtained which permanently
settle the troublesome question of the obligation of maintaining
ceremonial cleanness which still rests upon "the Jews which are among
the Gentiles." As we have seen, the settlement is as far from that of
Mark and the Pauline churches on the one side, as from the thoroughgoing
legalism of Jerusalem on the other. As late as the Pastoral Epistles
abstinence from "meats which God created to be received with
thanksgiving by them that believe and know the truth" is to the Pauline
churches a "doctrine of devils and seducing spirits" taught "through the
hypocrisy of men that speak lies." Distinctions of meats belong to
Jewish superstition, because "every creature of God is good and nothing
is to be rejected, if it be received with thanksgiving" (1st Tim. iv.
1-5). Mark, as we have seen, takes precisely this standpoint. He is
equally radical in condemning distinctions of meats as essentially "vain
worship," and a "commandment of men" (Mark vii. 1-23). In truth if we
distinguish one of Luke's _sources_ from Luke himself we shall find
exactly this doctrine taught to Peter himself by special divine
revelation in Acts x. 10-16; xi. 3-10. Only, as we have already seen (p.
59, note), this is not the application made by the Book of Acts, as it
now stands, of the material. To 'Luke' nothing could be more repugnant
than the idea of an apostle forsaking the religion of his fathers, of
which circumcision and "the customs" are an essential part. His
cancellation, in the story of Peter's revelation and the Apostle's
subsequent defence of it before the church in Jerusalem, of one of its
essential factors, viz. the right to _eat_ with Gentiles, regardless of
man-made distinctions of meats ("what _God_ hath cleansed make not
_thou_ common") is quite as significant as his restriction of even
Paul's activity to Greek-speaking _Jews_, until "the Spirit" has
expressly directed the church in Antioch, immediately after the
persecution of Agrippa I, to proceed with the propaganda. Both
alterations of the earlier form of the story are in line with a
multitude of minor indications, and furnish us, in combination with
them, the real keynote of the narrative. In Luke-Acts more clearly than
in any of the gospels the writer assumes the distinctive function of the
_historian_. He, too, would relate, like Mark, the origin of the
Christian faith, and that "from the very first." He even deduces the
pedigree of Jesus from "Adam, which was the son of God." But the object
is far more to prove the pedigree of the faith than the pedigree of
Jesus. Christianity is to be defended against the charge of being a
_nova superstitio_, a _religio illicita_. On the contrary it is the one
true and revealed religion, the perfect flower and consummation of
Judaism. Yet it is not, like Judaism, particularistic and national, but
universal; for while God at first made that nation the special
repository of his truth, it was his "determinate foreknowledge and
counsel" that they should reject and crucify their Messiah, making it
possible to "proclaim this salvation unto the Gentiles." The one thing
Luke is so anxiously concerned to prove that he wearies the reader with
constant reiteration of it, proclaims it, argues it, in season and out
of season, with his sources, against his sources, with the facts,
against the facts, is that this faith was never, never, offered to the
Gentiles except by express direction of God and after the Jews had
demonstrated to the last extremity of stiff-necked opposition that they
would have none of it. Christianity, then, and not Judaism, is the true
primitive and revealed religion, the heir of all the divine promises.

    Footnote 23: Note, also, how in Acts vi. 5 the list of
    deacon-evangelists concludes "and Nicholas _a proselyte of
    Antioch_."

We can see now why Luke finds it impossible to adopt Mark's story of a
missionary journey of Jesus in "the coasts of Tyre and Sidon" and will
not even mention the name of Cæsarea Philippi. His method in omitting
