marriage, and he was very angry to be asked to release a peasant whom
he had imprisoned, and to restore flocks which he had seized; and
especially was he furious at the request to buy the land, for he did not
wish to sell it, and so to lose control over the peasant-folk who lived
there.

But, nevertheless, in spite of his wrath, the count knew well enough
that he had no real right to do as he had done, and that King Louis knew
it also; and that therefore the very best thing he could do was to obey
the king's wishes at once.

King Louis had made his letter a polite request rather than a command,
because some of his unruly subjects, like Count Pierre, were proud and
difficult to manage, and he wished to settle matters pleasantly and
peaceably, if possible. And so, in asking him to honour the royal
wedding, he gave the count an excuse to yield to his king's wishes,
without hurting his pride so much as if he were obliged to obey a
command.

Count Pierre began to see this, too; and, moreover, he knew that,
notwithstanding the politeness of his letter, the king had plenty of
soldiers, and that he would not hesitate to send them to the Castle de
Bouchage, if necessary, to bring its lord to terms. And he very wisely
reflected that to fight King Louis would be a much more dangerous and
expensive undertaking than the private war with the Baron of Evreux,
which he already had on his hands.

Before yielding to the requests in the letter, however, Count Pierre
wished to satisfy himself that the messenger had correctly read it to
him. And so, haughtily demanding it for a few minutes, he hurried out of
the hall, and sent a page scampering off to bring to him a troubadour;
for one or more of these wandering singers were always to be found in
every nobleman's castle, and the count knew that most of them could
read.

When in a few minutes the page came back, followed, close at his heels,
by a man in motley dress, with a viol hung over his shoulders, Count
Pierre, without waiting to greet the latter, thrust the parchment into
his hands with the gruff command:

"There, fellow! read this letter for me instantly! and if thou makest a
single mistake, I will have thee strangled with the strings of thine own
viol, and tumbled off the highest turret of this castle before set of
sun!"

At this fierce threat, the troubadour began at once to read, taking care
to make no mistakes. Count Pierre listened attentively to every word,
and when the troubadour came to the end, having read it exactly as the
messenger had done, the count angrily snatched it from his hands, and,
swallowing his rage as best he could, went slowly back to the castle
hall.

Then, after a few moments' silence, he very ungraciously and
ill-naturedly gave orders that peasant Viaud be released from prison,
and the sheep sent back. He made a very wry face over the fifty extra
ones, and did not look at all anxious to celebrate King Louis's
approaching wedding.

And then he took the gold pieces which the messenger offered him, and
reluctantly scrawled his name (it was all he could write, and that very
badly) to a piece of parchment which the messenger had ready, and which,
when Count Pierre had signed it, proved that he had sold to King Louis
the land and cottage, and no longer held control over peasant Viaud or
any of his family.

When this was done, the messenger, bidding the nobleman a courteous
farewell, left the latter still very angry and scowling, and, above all,
lost in amazement that King Louis should take all this trouble on
account of a poor, unknown peasant, who had lived all his life on a tiny
farm in Normandy! And as no one ever explained things to him, Count
Pierre never did know how it had all come about, and that, however much
against his will, he was doing his part toward helping answer Gabriel's
little prayer.




CHAPTER X.

GABRIEL'S CHRISTMAS


WHEN the messenger reached the courtyard of the castle, he found peasant
Viaud awaiting him there. The poor man looked very pale and wan from his
imprisonment, and his face pitifully showed what anxiety he had suffered
in thinking about his family left with no one to help them. His clothes,
too, were thin and worn, and he shivered in the cold December wind.
Noticing this, the messenger at once sent word to Count Pierre that he
was sure King Louis would be highly gratified, if, in further honour of
his coming marriage, the count would supply peasant Viaud with a warm
suit of clothes before leaving the castle.

This message was almost too much for Count Pierre to bear, but he did
not dare to refuse. And the messenger smiled to himself when, by and by,
a page came and called Gabriel's father into the castle, from which, in
a little while, he came out, warmly clad, and quite bewildered at all
that was happening to him.

As they set out together for the Viaud cottage, peasant Viaud walking,
and the messenger riding very slowly, the latter explained to him all
about Gabriel's little prayer in the beautiful book, and how Lady Anne
had sent it to King Louis, to whom he owed his release from prison. But
the messenger added that, aside from the lad's father and mother, the
king did not wish any one, not even Gabriel himself, to know how it had
all come about.

For King Louis declared that he himself did not deserve any thanks, but
that the good God had only chosen the Lady Anne and himself and Count
Pierre (though the latter did not know it) as the means of answering
Gabriel's prayer, and of helping the Christ-child bring happiness at the
blessed Christmas-time. For King Louis had not forgotten that the great
day was near at hand.

Of the promised return of the sheep, and the buying of the farm by the
king, the messenger said nothing then; and when they had nearly reached
the cottage, he took leave of peasant Viaud and rode back to the Abbey.
For, having finished the king's errand, before going away, he wanted to
say good-bye to the Abbot and brothers of St. Martin's, and also to get
some of his belongings which he had left at the Abbey.

A few minutes after the messenger had left him, peasant Viaud reached
the cottage and raised the latch,--but then it is no use trying to tell
how surprised and happy they all were! how they hugged and kissed each
other, and laughed and cried!

And then, when the first excitement was over, they began soberly to
wonder what they would do next; for they still feared the displeasure of
Count Pierre, and still did not know where to turn to raise the tax, or
to help their poverty.

"If only he had not taken the sheep," said Gabriel's mother, sadly, "at
least I could have spun warm clothes for all of us!"

But even as she spoke, a loud "Baa! Baa!" sounded from up the road, and
presently along came a large flock of sheep followed by one of Count
Pierre's shepherds, who, without saying a word to any one, skilfully
guided them into the Viaud sheepfold, and there safely penned them in;
then, still without a word, he turned about and went off in the
direction of the castle.

Gabriel's father and mother, who from the cottage window had watched all
this in silent amazement, looked at each other, too bewildered to speak.
Then they went out together to the sheepfold, and peasant Viaud, who
began to realize that this, too, must be part of King Louis's orders,
explained to his wife that which the messenger had told him. When he had
finished, they went back, hand in hand, to the house, their eyes filled
with happy tears, and in their hearts a great tenderness for the little
son who had brought help to them.

[Illustration: "_He passed a little peasant boy_"]

Just before dark, that same afternoon, the king's messenger, having
taken leave of the Abbey folk, once more passed along the highroad. On
his way, he was particular to stop at the Viaud cottage, where he
contrived to have a few minutes' talk alone with Gabriel's mother, and
then wishing her a merry Christmas, he spurred his horse, and rode along
on his journey back to Paris.

As he neared St. Martin's village, he passed a little peasant boy, in a
worn blouse, walking toward the country; and had he known that this same
lad was the Gabriel because of whom, at King Louis's order, he had
ridden all the way from Paris, he would certainly have looked at the boy
with keen interest.

While for his part, had Gabriel known that the strange horseman was a
messenger from the king, and that he had that day played a very
important part in the affairs of the Viaud family,--had he known
this,--he surely would have stood stock-still and opened his eyes wide
with amazement!

But the messenger was absorbed in his own thoughts, and so rode swiftly
on; while poor Gabriel was too sad and wretched to pay much attention to
any one.

As the lad drew near home, however, all at once he fancied he heard the
bleating of sheep. At this he pricked up his ears and began to run, his
heart suddenly beating very fast with excitement!

When he reached the sheepfold, sure enough, there was no mistaking the
sounds within. He opened the door and hurried through the thatched shed,
noting with delight the rows of woolly backs glistening in the twilight,
and then, bursting into the cottage, rushed up to his father and kissed
and hugged him with all his might!

Indeed, Gabriel was so happy and excited that he did not realize that he
was not at all surprised with their good fortune. For miserable as he
had been for weeks, and though he had thought that he had quite
despaired of his prayer being answered, yet deep down in his heart,
without knowing it, all the while he had cherished a strong hope that it
would be.

Nor was Brother Stephen surprised either, when, at barely daybreak the
next morning, before going to his work, Gabriel hurried up to the Abbey
and told him all about it. His face beamed with delight, however, and he
seemed almost as happy over it all as Gabriel himself. He smiled, too,
but said nothing, as the lad wondered over and over what God had done to
Count Pierre, to make him willing to free his father and restore the
sheep! He only said, as he gently patted Gabriel's hair:

"There, there, little one! the good God hath many ways of softening
men's hearts, and never thou mind in what manner he hath chosen to
manage the Count Pierre!"

Just then one of the monks went past the open door, his arms full of
evergreens, and carrying in his hand a pot of the pretty white flowers
that the Norman peasant folk call Christmas roses. Seeing him, Brother
Stephen told Gabriel that he must go and help the brothers trim the
Abbey church for the joyous service of the morrow; and so with another
affectionate little pat, he went out to do his part in arranging the
holiday greens and garlands and tall wax candles, while Gabriel hurried
off to his work in the village.

The little boy was so happy, though, over the things that had happened
at home, that he went about all day in a sort of wondering dream. And
that evening as he went home from his work, very tired, but still
dreaming, the early Christmas-eve stars shone and twinkled so radiantly
over his head and the snow sparkled so brightly under his feet, that he
fairly tingled through and through with the nameless, magic happiness of
the blessed season!

And when he reached home, and sat down next to his father while they ate
their scanty supper, they all felt so glad to be together again that
nobody minded that the pieces of black bread were smaller than ever,
and that when the cold wind blew through the crevices of the cottage
walls, there was not enough fire on the hearth to keep them from
shivering.

Indeed, they were all so much happier than they had been for many weeks,
that when Gabriel and the younger children went to bed, the latter, with
many little gurgles of laughter, arranged their little wooden shoes on
the hearth, just as they had always done on Christmas eve.

For they said to each other, Jean, and Margot, and little Guillaume,
that surely the good God had not forgotten them after all! Had he not
brought back their father and the sheep? And surely he would tell the
little Christ-child to bring them a few Christmas apples and nuts!

Gabriel, however, took no part in their talk, and he did not set his
shoes on the hearth with the others; not that he feared they would be
forgotten, but rather because he thought that he had already asked for
so much and been so generously answered, that he had had his share of
Christmas happiness.

His father was freed from prison, and the flock of sheep, with fifty
more than they had had before, were back in the fold; and though they
were not yet relieved from the tax, nor was their land restored to them,
as he had prayed, yet he felt sure that these, too, would come about in
some way.

And so, considering all these things, he did not quite like to set out
his wooden shoes, and thus invite the Christ-child to give him more; for
he knew the Christ-child had a great many shoes to attend to that night.
So Gabriel, as he made himself ready for bed, pretended not to hear the
chatter of his little brothers and sister, nor to notice what they were
doing.

When peasant Viaud, however, saw them standing their little empty shoes
in front of the meagre fire, he bowed his head on his hands, and the
tears trickled through his fingers. But the mother smiled softly to
herself, as she kissed each of the children and tucked them into their
worn sheepskin covers.

Next morning, at the first peep of day, every one in the cottage was
wide awake; and as soon as they opened their eyes, the children all
jumped out of bed and ran to the hearth with little screams of delight.
For there stood the little wooden shoes,--Gabriel's, too, though he had
not put them there,--and even a larger one apiece for the father and
mother, and the blessed Christ-child had not forgotten one!

Only instead of apples and nuts, they were filled with the most
wonderful bonbons; strange sugar birds, and animals, and candied fruits
such as no peasant child in Normandy had ever before seen; for they
were sweetmeats that no one but the cooks of old Paris knew just how to
make.

And then, as with eager fingers the children drew out these marvels,
down in the toe of each shoe they found a little porcupine of white
sugar with pink quills tipped with a tiny, gilded, candy crown; and last
of all, after each little porcupine, out tumbled a shining yellow gold
piece stamped with the likeness of King Louis.

Even the larger shoes were filled with bonbons, too, and from the toe of
the mother's out dropped a gold piece, like the others, only larger. But
when the father, with clumsy hands, emptied his shoe, instead of a gold
piece, there fell out a small parchment roll fastened with a silken
cord, and showing at one corner a wax seal bearing the print of the
little royal porcupine and crown.

Peasant Viaud gazed at it for a few minutes, in utter bewilderment, and
then handing it to Gabriel, who was standing by, he said:

"Here, child, 'tis a bit of writing, and thou art the only one of us who
can read. See if Brother Stephen's lessons have taken thee far enough to
make out the meaning of this!"

Gabriel took the roll and eagerly untied the cord, and then he carefully
spelled out every word of the writing, which was signed by Count Pierre
de Bouchage.

For it was the very same parchment which King Louis's messenger had
made Count Pierre sign to prove that he had sold to the king, for a
certain sum of gold, the old Viaud farm, together with a piece of good
land adjoining it; and then, at the end of the deed, as the writing was
called, there were a few lines from King Louis himself, which said that
in honour of the blessed Christmas-time the king took pleasure in
presenting to peasant Viaud, and his heirs for ever, everything that he
had bought from Count Pierre.

When Gabriel had finished reading, no one spoke for a little while; it
was so hard to realize the crowning good fortune that had befallen them.
Peasant Viaud looked fairly dazed, and the mother laughed and cried as
she snatched Gabriel to her and kissed him again and again. The younger
children did not understand what it all meant, and so went on munching
their sweetmeats without paying much attention to the little piece of
parchment which Gabriel still held in his hand.

As for Gabriel, he really had had no idea that any one could possibly be
so happy as he himself was at that moment! He had not the least notion
of how it had all come about; he only knew that his heart was fairly
bursting with gratitude to the dear God who had answered his little
prayer so much more joyously and wonderfully than he had ever dared to
dream of!

In his excitement he ran out of the house and hurried into the
sheepfold, where he patted the soft woolly backs of each of the sheep,
and then he raced around the snowy meadows trying to realize that all
these belonged to his family for ever! And that Count Pierre could never
again imprison his father or worry him with heavy taxes!

But the wonders of this wonderful day were not yet over; for presently,
as Gabriel raised his eyes, he saw a strange horseman coming down the
road and looking inquiringly in the direction of the Viaud cottage. Then
seeing the boy standing in the meadow, the horseman called out:

"Ho, lad! Is this the farm of the peasant Viaud?"

"Yes, sir," answered Gabriel, coming up to the road; and then,

"Art thou Gabriel?" asked the rider, stopping and looking curiously at
the little boy.

When again Gabriel wonderingly answered, "Yes, sir," the stranger
dismounted, and, after tying his horse, began deliberately unfastening
the two fat saddle-bags hanging over the back of the latter; and loading
himself with as much as he could carry, he gave Gabriel an armful, too,
and walked toward the cottage.

To the surprised looks and questions of Gabriel's father and mother, he
only said that the Christ-child had been in the castle of the Lady Anne
of Bretagne, and had ordered him to bring certain things to the family
of a Norman peasant boy named Gabriel Viaud.

And such delightful things as they were! There was a great roll of
thick, soft blue cloth, so that they could all be warmly clad without
waiting for the mother to spin the wool from the sheeps' backs. There
were nice little squirrel-fur caps for all the children; there were more
yellow gold pieces; and then there was a large package of the most
enchanting sweetmeats, such as the Bretons make at Christmas-time;
little "magi-cakes," as they were called, each cut in the shape of a
star and covered with spices and sugar; curious old-fashioned candies
and sugared chestnuts; and a pretty basket filled with small round
loaves of the fine, white bread of Bretagne; only instead of the
ordinary baking, these loaves were of a special holiday kind, with
raisins, and nuts, and dried sweet-locust blossoms sprinkled over the
top.

Indeed, perhaps never before had so marvellous a feast been spread under
a peasant roof in Normandy! All were beside themselves with delight; and
while the younger children were dancing round and round in happy
bewilderment, Gabriel snatched up a basket, and hurriedly filling it
with some of the choicest of the sweetmeats, started off at a brisk run
for the Abbey; for he wanted to share some of his Christmas happiness
with Brother Stephen.

When he reached the Abbey, his eyes bright with excitement, and his
cheeks rosy from the crisp cold air, and poured out to Brother Stephen
the story of their fresh good fortune, the monk laughed with delight,
and felt that he, too, was having the happiest Christmas he had ever
known.

And then, by and by, when he took Gabriel by the hand and led him into
the Abbey church for the beautiful Christmas service, as the little boy
knelt on the stone floor and gazed around at the lovely garlands of
green, and the twinkling candles and white Christmas roses on the altar,
half-hidden by the clouds of fragrant incense that floated up from the
censers the little acolytes were swinging to and fro,--as he listened to
the glorious music from the choir, and above all, as he thought of how
the dear God had answered his prayer, the tears sprang to his eyes from
very joy and gratitude! And perhaps that Christmas morning no one in all
France, not even King Louis himself, was quite so happy as the little
peasant boy, Gabriel Viaud.




CHAPTER XI.

THE KING'S ILLUMINATOR


AND to say that he was happier than even King Louis, is saying a very
great deal; for King Louis spent the day most delightfully in Bretagne,
in the castle of his bride to be, the Lady Anne. And then, just after
the holiday season had passed, early in January, he and Lady Anne were
married with great ceremony and splendour.

After the wedding, for three months, the king and queen lingered in
Bretagne; enjoying themselves by night with magnificent entertainments
in the castle, and by day in riding over the frosty fields and in
hunting, of which both of them were very fond. And then in April, when
the first hawthorn buds were beginning to break, they journeyed down to
Paris to live in the king's palace.

Before long, King Louis and Queen Anne decided to make a number of
improvements in this palace; and as they both were great lovers of
beautiful books, they determined, among other things, to build a large
writing-room where they could have skilful illuminators always at work
making lovely books for them.

When this room was finished, and they began to think of whom they would
employ, the first one they spoke of was Brother Stephen, whose exquisite
work on the book of hours had so delighted them. But then, much as they
wished to have him in the palace, they did not think it possible to do
so, as they knew he belonged to the brotherhood of St. Martin's Abbey,
and so of course had taken vows to spend his whole life there.

It chanced, however, soon after this, that King Louis happened to have a
little talk with the messenger he had sent to the Abbey at Christmas
time to see about Gabriel. And this messenger told the king that while
there the Abbot, in speaking to him of Brother Stephen's work, had said
that the latter really wished to leave the brotherhood and go into the
world to paint; and that, though he had refused his request to be freed
from his vows, yet the monk had worked so faithfully at King Louis's
book that he thought he had earned his freedom, and that perhaps he, the
Abbot, had done wrong in forcing him to stay at the Abbey if he wished
to study his art elsewhere.

In short, he had as much as said that if Brother Stephen ever again
asked for his freedom, he would grant it; and this showed that the Abbot
had relented and unbent a great deal more than any one could ever have
believed possible.

When King Louis heard what the messenger told him, he was greatly
pleased; and after talking it over with the queen, he decided to send
the same messenger post-haste back to the Abbey to ask for the services
of Brother Stephen before the Abbot might again change his mind.

Now King Louis was a very liberal monarch, and both he and Queen Anne
liked nothing better than to encourage and help along real artists. And
so they thought that they would supply Brother Stephen with money so
that he could travel about and study and paint as he chose, even if he
preferred always to paint larger pictures rather than to illuminate
books; though they hoped that once in awhile he might spend a little
time in their fine new writing-room.

When the messenger started, they told him to explain all this to Brother
Stephen, and let the latter plan his work in whatever way best pleased
him.

But the queen gave particular orders that, if possible, the messenger
was to bring the peasant boy, Gabriel Viaud, back to the palace with
him; for she thought the lad's work on the page where he had written his
little prayer showed such promise that she wished to see him, and to
have him continue his training in the beautiful art of illumination.

The messenger, having thus received his orders, at once set out again
for Normandy; and he found this second journey much more pleasant than
the one he had made before, through the winter snows. For this time he
rode under tall poplar-trees and between green hedgerows, where the
cuckoos and fieldfares sang all day long. And when, after several days'
travelling, he drew near St. Martin's Abbey, the country on either side
of the road was pink with wild roses and meadowsweet, just as it had
been a year before, when Gabriel used to gather the clusters of
field-flowers for Brother Stephen to paint in the beautiful book.

Indeed, Gabriel still gathered the wild flowers every day, but only
because he loved them; for though, since their better fortunes, he was
again studying and working with Brother Stephen, the latter was then
busy on a long book of monastery rules, with only here and there a
coloured initial letter, and which altogether was not nearly so
interesting as had been the book of hours with its lovely painted
borders.

And so when the messenger reached the Abbey, and made known his errand,
they were both overjoyed at the prospect King Louis offered them.

After talking with the messenger, the Abbot, true to his word, in a
solemn ceremony, freed Brother Stephen from his vows of obedience to
the rules of St. Martin's brotherhood; and then he gave both him and
Gabriel his blessing.

Brother Stephen, who had been too proud to ask a second time for his
freedom, was now delighted that it had all come about in the way it did,
and that he could devote his time to painting anything he chose.

Gabriel, too, was enchanted at the thought of all that he could do and
learn in the king's palace; and though he felt it hard to leave his
home, Queen Anne had kindly made it easier for him by promising that
sometimes he might come back for a little visit.

So in a few days he and Brother Stephen had made all their preparations
to leave; and they set out, Gabriel going with the messenger directly to
King Louis's palace in Paris; while Brother Stephen, taking the bag of
gold pieces which the king and queen had sent for him, travelled to many
of the great cities of Europe, where he studied the wonderful paintings
of the world's most famous masters, and where he himself made many
beautiful pictures. In this way he spent a number of happy months.

And then, just as a great many other people do, who find out that as
soon as they are not compelled to do a certain kind of work, they really
like it very much better than they thought, so, Brother Stephen, being
no longer obliged to illuminate books, all at once discovered that he
really enjoyed painting them more than anything else in the world.

And so it was that, by and by, to the gratification of the king and
queen, and above all to the great delight of Gabriel, he made his way to
the great writing-room of the palace in Paris. And there, in the doing
of his exquisite artistic work, he passed the rest of his long and happy
life.

And through all the years the warm love and friendship between himself
and Gabriel was as sweet and beautiful and as unchanging as any of the
white and golden lilies that they painted in their rarest books. For
Gabriel, too, became one of the finest illuminators of the time, and
his work was much sought for by the great nobles of the land.

Indeed, to this day, many of the wonderful illuminations that were made
in that writing-room are still carefully kept in the great libraries and
museums of France and of Europe. And some time, if ever you have the
happiness to visit one of these, and are there shown some of the painted
books from the palace of King Louis XII. and Queen Anne, if the work is
especially lovely, you may be quite certain that either Brother Stephen,
or Gabriel, or perhaps both of them together, had a hand in its making.

          THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's Gabriel and the Hour Book, by Evaleen Stein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GABRIEL AND THE HOUR BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 27916-8.txt or 27916-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/9/1/27916/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Brothers Karamazov</title>
      <author><name reg="Dostoyevsky, Fyodor">Fyodor Dostoyevsky</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 12, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28054</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-02-12">February 12, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online Distributed
            Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made available
            by The Internet Archive).
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Brothers Karamazov</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Translated from the Russian of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Fyodor Dostoyevsky</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">by Constance Garnett</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Lowell Press</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">New York</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book I. The History Of A Family</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov</head>

<p>
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son
of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, a land owner well known
in our district in his own day, and still remembered among us owing
to his gloomy and tragic death, which happened thirteen years ago,
and which I shall describe in its proper place. For the present I
will only say that this <q>landowner</q>&mdash;for so we used to call him,
although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own estate&mdash;was a
strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, a type abject
and vicious and at the same time senseless. But he was one of those
senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their
worldly affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch,
for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of
the smallest; he ran to dine at other men's tables, and fastened on
them as a toady, yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred
thousand roubles in hard cash. At the same time, he was all his life
one of the most senseless, fantastical fellows in the whole district.
I repeat, it was not stupidity&mdash;the majority of these fantastical fellows
are shrewd and intelligent enough&mdash;but just senselessness, and
a peculiar national form of it.
</p>

<p>
He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by
his first wife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor
Pavlovitch's first wife, Adelaïda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly
rich and distinguished noble family, also landowners in our district,
the Miüsovs. How it came to pass that an heiress, who was also
a beauty, and moreover one of those vigorous, intelligent girls, so
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
common in this generation, but sometimes also to be found in the
last, could have married such a worthless, puny weakling, as we all
called him, I won't attempt to explain. I knew a young lady of the
last <q>romantic</q> generation who after some years of an enigmatic
passion for a gentleman, whom she might quite easily have married
at any moment, invented insuperable obstacles to their union, and
ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and
rapid river from a high bank, almost a precipice, and so perished,
entirely to satisfy her own caprice, and to be like Shakespeare's
Ophelia. Indeed, if this precipice, a chosen and favorite spot of hers,
had been less picturesque, if there had been a prosaic flat bank in
its place, most likely the suicide would never have taken place.
This is a fact, and probably there have been not a few similar
instances in the last two or three generations. Adelaïda Ivanovna
Miüsov's action was similarly, no doubt, an echo of other people's
ideas, and was due to the irritation caused by lack of mental freedom.
She wanted, perhaps, to show her feminine independence, to
override class distinctions and the despotism of her family. And a
pliable imagination persuaded her, we must suppose, for a brief
moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasitic position,
was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressive epoch,
though he was, in fact, an ill-natured buffoon and nothing more.
What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an
elopement, and this greatly captivated Adelaïda Ivanovna's fancy.
Fyodor Pavlovitch's position at the time made him specially eager
for any such enterprise, for he was passionately anxious to make a
career in one way or another. To attach himself to a good family
and obtain a dowry was an alluring prospect. As for mutual love
it did not exist apparently, either in the bride or in him, in spite
of Adelaïda Ivanovna's beauty. This was, perhaps, a unique case of
the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was always of a
voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on the
slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman
who made no particular appeal to his senses.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after the elopement Adelaïda Ivanovna discerned
in a flash that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt.
The marriage accordingly showed itself in its true colors with
extraordinary rapidity. Although the family accepted the event
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
pretty quickly and apportioned the runaway bride her dowry, the
husband and wife began to lead a most disorderly life, and there
were everlasting scenes between them. It was said that the young
wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity than Fyodor
Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money up
to twenty-five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that
those thousands were lost to her for ever. The little village and the
rather fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his
utmost for a long time to transfer to his name, by means of some
deed of conveyance. He would probably have succeeded, merely
from her moral fatigue and desire to get rid of him, and from the
contempt and loathing he aroused by his persistent and shameless
importunity. But, fortunately, Adelaïda Ivanovna's family intervened
and circumvented his greediness. It is known for a fact
that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife, but
rumor had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but
was beaten by her, for she was a hot-tempered, bold, dark-browed,
impatient woman, possessed of remarkable physical strength. Finally,
she left the house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a
destitute divinity student, leaving Mitya, a child of three years old,
in her husband's hands. Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced
a regular harem into the house, and abandoned himself to orgies of
drunkenness. In the intervals he used to drive all over the province,
complaining tearfully to each and all of Adelaïda Ivanovna's having
left him, going into details too disgraceful for a husband to
mention in regard to his own married life. What seemed to gratify
him and flatter his self-love most was to play the ridiculous part
of the injured husband, and to parade his woes with embellishments.
</p>

<p>
<q>One would think that you'd got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch,
you seem so pleased in spite of your sorrow,</q> scoffers said
to him. Many even added that he was glad of a new comic part
in which to play the buffoon, and that it was simply to make it
funnier that he pretended to be unaware of his ludicrous position.
But, who knows, it may have been simplicity. At last he succeeded
in getting on the track of his runaway wife. The poor woman
turned out to be in Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinity
student, and where she had thrown herself into a life of complete
emancipation. Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about,
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
making preparations to go to Petersburg, with what object he could
not himself have said. He would perhaps have really gone; but
having determined to do so he felt at once entitled to fortify himself
for the journey by another bout of reckless drinking. And just
at that time his wife's family received the news of her death in
Petersburg. She had died quite suddenly in a garret, according to
one story, of typhus, or as another version had it, of starvation.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife's death, and
the story is that he ran out into the street and began shouting with
joy, raising his hands to Heaven: <q>Lord, now lettest Thou Thy
servant depart in peace,</q> but others say he wept without restraint
like a little child, so much so that people were sorry for him, in
spite of the repulsion he inspired. It is quite possible that both versions
were true, that he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time
wept for her who released him. As a general rule, people, even the
wicked, are much more naïve and simple-hearted than we suppose.
And we ourselves are, too.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son</head>

<p>
You can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and
how he would bring up his children. His behavior as a father
was exactly what might be expected. He completely abandoned the
child of his marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna, not from malice,
nor because of his matrimonial grievances, but simply because he
forgot him. While he was wearying every one with his tears and
complaints, and turning his house into a sink of debauchery, a faithful
servant of the family, Grigory, took the three-year-old Mitya
into his care. If he hadn't looked after him there would have been
no one even to change the baby's little shirt.
</p>

<p>
It happened moreover that the child's relations on his mother's
side forgot him too at first. His grandfather was no longer living,
his widow, Mitya's grandmother, had moved to Moscow, and was
seriously ill, while his daughters were married, so that Mitya remained
for almost a whole year in old Grigory's charge and lived
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
with him in the servant's cottage. But if his father had remembered
him (he could not, indeed, have been altogether unaware of his
existence) he would have sent him back to the cottage, as the child
would only have been in the way of his debaucheries. But a cousin
of Mitya's mother, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, happened to return
from Paris. He lived for many years afterwards abroad, but
was at that time quite a young man, and distinguished among the
Miüsovs as a man of enlightened ideas and of European culture,
who had been in the capitals and abroad. Towards the end of his
life he became a Liberal of the type common in the forties and fifties.
In the course of his career he had come into contact with
many of the most Liberal men of his epoch, both in Russia and
abroad. He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally, and in
his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the
Paris Revolution of February 1848, hinting that he himself had
almost taken part in the fighting on the barricades. This was one
of the most grateful recollections of his youth. He had an independent
property of about a thousand souls, to reckon in the old
style. His splendid estate lay on the outskirts of our little town and
bordered on the lands of our famous monastery, with which Pyotr
Alexandrovitch began an endless lawsuit, almost as soon as he
came into the estate, concerning the rights of fishing in the river or
wood-cutting in the forest, I don't know exactly which. He regarded
it as his duty as a citizen and a man of culture to open an
attack upon the <q>clericals.</q> Hearing all about Adelaïda Ivanovna,
whom he, of course, remembered, and in whom he had at one time
been interested, and learning of the existence of Mitya, he intervened,
in spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for
Fyodor Pavlovitch. He made the latter's acquaintance for the first
time, and told him directly that he wished to undertake the child's
education. He used long afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch,
that when he began to speak of Mitya, Fyodor Pavlovitch looked
for some time as though he did not understand what child he was
talking about, and even as though he was surprised to hear that he
had a little son in the house. The story may have been exaggerated,
yet it must have been something like the truth.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting, of suddenly
playing an unexpected part, sometimes without any motive for doing
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
so, and even to his own direct disadvantage, as, for instance,
in the present case. This habit, however, is characteristic of a very
great number of people, some of them very clever ones, not like
Fyodor Pavlovitch. Pyotr Alexandrovitch carried the business
through vigorously, and was appointed, with Fyodor Pavlovitch,
joint guardian of the child, who had a small property, a house and
land, left him by his mother. Mitya did, in fact, pass into this
cousin's keeping, but as the latter had no family of his own, and
after securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at
once to Paris, he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins, a lady
living in Moscow. It came to pass that, settling permanently in
Paris he, too, forgot the child, especially when the Revolution of
February broke out, making an impression on his mind that he remembered
all the rest of his life. The Moscow lady died, and Mitya
passed into the care of one of her married daughters. I believe
he changed his home a fourth time later on. I won't enlarge upon
that now, as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor Pavlovitch's
firstborn, and must confine myself now to the most essential facts
about him, without which I could not begin my story.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, this Mitya, or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch, was
the only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch's three sons who grew up in the
belief that he had property, and that he would be independent on
coming of age. He spent an irregular boyhood and youth. He did
not finish his studies at the gymnasium, he got into a military school,
then went to the Caucasus, was promoted, fought a duel, and was
degraded to the ranks, earned promotion again, led a wild life, and
spent a good deal of money. He did not begin to receive any income
from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age, and until then
got into debt. He saw and knew his father, Fyodor Pavlovitch, for
the first time on coming of age, when he visited our neighborhood
on purpose to settle with him about his property. He seems not to
have liked his father. He did not stay long with him, and made
haste to get away, having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of
money, and entering into an agreement for future payments from
the estate, of the revenues and value of which he was unable (a fact
worthy of note), upon this occasion, to get a statement from his
father. Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time then (this,
too, should be noted) that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated idea
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
of his property. Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with
this, as it fell in with his own designs. He gathered only that the
young man was frivolous, unruly, of violent passions, impatient,
and dissipated, and that if he could only obtain ready money he
would be satisfied, although only, of course, for a short time. So
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take advantage of this fact, sending
him from time to time small doles, installments. In the end, when
four years later, Mitya, losing patience, came a second time to our
little town to settle up once for all with his father, it turned out
to his amazement that he had nothing, that it was difficult to get
an account even, that he had received the whole value of his property
in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was perhaps even
in debt to him, that by various agreements into which he had, of
his own desire, entered at various previous dates, he had no right
to expect anything more, and so on, and so on. The young man
was overwhelmed, suspected deceit and cheating, and was almost
beside himself. And, indeed, this circumstance led to the catastrophe,
the account of which forms the subject of my first introductory
story, or rather the external side of it. But before I pass
to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch's other two
sons, and of their origin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Second Marriage And The Second Family</head>

<p>
Very shortly after getting his four-year-old Mitya off his hands
Fyodor Pavlovitch married a second time. His second marriage
lasted eight years. He took this second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, also
a very young girl, from another province, where he had gone upon
some small piece of business in company with a Jew. Though
Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious debauchee he
never neglected investing his capital, and managed his business
affairs very successfully, though, no doubt, not over-scrupulously.
Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon, and was
left from childhood an orphan without relations. She grew up
in the house of a general's widow, a wealthy old lady of good position,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
who was at once her benefactress and tormentor. I do not
know the details, but I have only heard that the orphan girl, a
meek and gentle creature, was once cut down from a halter in
which she was hanging from a nail in the loft, so terrible were her
sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging of this old
woman, who was apparently not bad-hearted but had become an
insufferable tyrant through idleness.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer; inquiries were made about
him and he was refused. But again, as in his first marriage, he proposed
an elopement to the orphan girl. There is very little doubt
that she would not on any account have married him if she had
known a little more about him in time. But she lived in another
province; besides, what could a little girl of sixteen know about it,
except that she would be better at the bottom of the river than
remaining with her benefactress. So the poor child exchanged a
benefactress for a benefactor. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get a
penny this time, for the general's widow was furious. She gave
them nothing and cursed them both. But he had not reckoned on
a dowry; what allured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent
girl, above all her innocent appearance, which had a peculiar
attraction for a vicious profligate, who had hitherto admired only
the coarser types of feminine beauty.
</p>

