
"The country!" M. de Vidoche exclaimed, with an impatient oath. "She
would bury herself there if she could!" And he added something under
his breath, the point of which it was not very difficult to guess.

Madame de Vidoche forced a smile, striving, woman-like, to cover all.
"It is natural I should like Pinatel," she said timidly, her eye on
her husband. "I have lived there so much."

"Yes, madame, you are never tired of reminding me of that!" M. de
Vidoche retorted harshly. Women who are afraid of their husbands say
the right thing once in a hundred times. "You will tell this gentleman
in a moment that I was a beggar when I married you! But if I was----"

"Oh, Charles!" she murmured faintly.

"That is right! Cry now!" he exclaimed brutally. "Thank God, however,
here is supper. And after supper we go on to Vernon. The roads are
rutty, and you will have something else to do besides cry then."

The man in black, going on with his meal at the other end of the
table, listened with an impassive face. Like all his profession, he
seemed inclined to hear rather than to talk. But when supper came up
with only one plate for the two--a mistake due to the crowded state of
the inn--and M. de Vidoche fell to scolding very loudly, he seemed
unable to refrain from saying a word in the innkeeper's defence. "It
is not so very unusual for the husband to share his wife's plate," he
said coolly; "and sometimes a good deal more that is hers."

M. de Vidoche looked at him for a moment, as if he were minded to ask
him what business it was of his; but he thought better of it, and
instead said, with a scowl, "It is not so very unusual either for
astrologers to make mistakes."

"Quacks," the man in black said calmly.

"I quite agree," M. de Vidoche replied, with mock politeness. "I
accept the correction."

"Yet there is one thing to be said even then," the astrologer
continued, slowly leaning forward, and, as if by chance, moving
one of the candles so as to bring it directly between madame and
himself. "I have noticed it, M. de Vidoche. They make mistakes
sometimes in predicting marriages, and even births. But never in
predicting--deaths."

M. de Vidoche, who may have had some key in his own breast which
unlocked the full meaning of the other's words, started and looked
across at him. Whatever he read in the pale, sombre countenance which
the removal of the candle fully revealed to him, and in which the
eyes, burning vividly, seemed alone alive, he shuddered. He made no
reply. His look dropped. Even a little of his high colour left his
checks. He went on with his meal in silence. The four tall candles
still burned dully on the table. But to M. de Vidoche they seemed on a
sudden to be the candles that burn by the side of a corpse. In a flash
he saw a room hung with black, a bed, and a silent covered form on
it--a form with wan, fair hair--a woman's. And then he saw other
things.

Clearly, the astrologer was no ordinary man.

He seemed to take no notice, however, of the effect his words had
produced. Indeed, he no longer urged his attentions on M. de Vidoche.
He turned politely to madame, and made some commonplace observation on
the roads. She answered it--inattentively.

"You are looking at my boy," he continued; for Jehan was waiting
inside the door, watching with a frightened, fascinated gaze his
master's every act and movement. "I do not wonder that he attracts the
ladies' eyes."

"He is a handsome child," she answered, smiling faintly.

"Yes, he is good-looking," the man in black rejoined. "There is one
thing which men of science sell that he will never need."

"What is that?" she asked curiously, looking at the astrologer for the
first time with attention.

"A love-philtre," he answered courteously. "His looks, like madame's,
will always supply its place."

She coloured, smiling a little sadly. "Are there such things?" she
said. "Is it true?--I mean, I always thought that they were a child's
tale."

"No more than poisons and antidotes, madame," he answered earnestly,
"the preservative power of salt, or the destructive power of
gunpowder. You take the Queen's herb, you sneeze; the drug of
Paracelsus, you sleep; wine, you see double. Why is the powder of
attraction more wonderful than these? Or if you remain unconvinced,"
he continued more lightly, "look round you, madame. You see young men
loving old women, the high-born allying themselves with the vulgar,
the ugly enchanting the beautiful. You see a hundred inexplicable
matches. Believe me, it is we who make them. I speak without motive,"
he added, bowing, "for Madame de Vidoche can never have need of other
philtre than her eyes."

Madame, toying idly with a plate, her regards on the table, sighed.
"And yet they say matches are made in heaven," she murmured softly.

"It is from heaven--from the stars--we derive our knowledge," he
answered, in the same tone.

But his face!--it was well she did not see that! And before more
passed, M. de Vidoche broke into the conversation. "What rubbish is
this?" he said, speaking roughly to his wife. "Have you finished? Then
let us pay this rascally landlord and be off. If you do not want to
spend the night on the road, that is. Where are those fools of
servants?"

He rose, and went to the door and shouted for them, and came back
and took up his cloak and hat with much movement and bustle.
But it was noticeable in all he did that he never once met the
astrologer's eye or looked his way. Even when he bade him a surly
"Good-night"--casually uttered in the midst of injunctions to his wife
to be quick--he spoke over his shoulder; and he left the room in the
same fashion, completely absorbed, it seemed, in the fastening of his
cloak.

Some, treated in this cavalier fashion, might have been hurt, and some
might have resented it. But the man in black did neither. Left alone,
he remained by the table in an expectant attitude, a sneering smile,
which the light of the candles threw into high relief, on his grim
visage. Suddenly the door opened, and M. de Vidoche, cloaked and
covered, came in. Without raising his eyes, he looked round the
room--for something he had mislaid, it seemed.

"Oh, by the way," he said suddenly, and without looking up.

"_My address?_" the man in black interjected, with a devilish
readiness. "The end of the Rue Touchet in the Quartier du Marais, near
the river. Where, believe me," he continued, with a mocking bow, "I
shall give you madame's horoscope with the greatest pleasure, or any
other little matter you may require."

"I think you are the devil!" M. de Vidoche muttered wrathfully, his
cheek growing pale.

"Possibly," the astrologer answered. "In that or any other case--_au
revoir!_"

When the landlord came up a little later to apologise to M. Solomon
Nôtredame de Paris for the inconvenience to which he had unwillingly
put him, he found his guest in high good-humour. "It is nothing, my
friend--it is nothing," M. Nôtredame said kindly. "I found my company
good enough. This M. de Vidoche is of this country; and a rich man, I
understand."

"Through his wife," the host said cautiously. "Ah! so rich that she
could build our old castle here from the ground again."

"Madame de Vidoche was of Pinatel."

"To be sure. Monsieur knows everything. By Jumiéges to the north. I
have been there once. But she has a house in Paris besides, and
estates, I hear, in the south--in Perigord."

"Ha!" the astrologer muttered. "Perigord again. That is odd, now."




                              CHAPTER IV.

                      THE HOUSE WITH TWO DOORS.


On the site of the old Palais des Tournelles, where was held the
tournament in which Henry the Second was killed, Henry the Fourth
built the Place Royale. You will not find it called by that name in
any map of Paris of to-day; modern France, which has no history,
traditions, or reverence, has carefully erased such landmarks in
favour of her Grévys and Eiffels, her journalists and soap-boilers.
But for all that, and though the Place Royale has now lost even its
name, in the reign of the thirteenth Louis it was the centre of
fashion. The Quartier du Marais, in which it stood, opposite the Ile
de St. Louis, was then the Court quarter. It saw coaches come into
common use among the nobility, and ruffs and primero go out, and a
great many other queer things, such as Court quarters in those days
looked to see.

The back stairs of a palace, however, are seldom an improving or
brilliant place; or if they can be said to be brilliant at all, their
brightness is of a somewhat lurid and ghastly character. The king's
amusements--very royal and natural, no doubt, and, when viewed from
the proper quarter, attractive enough--have another side; and that
side is towards the back stairs. It is the same with the Court and its
purlieus. They are the rough side of the cloth, the underside of the
moss, the cancer under the fair linen. Secrets are no secrets there;
and so it has always been. Things De Thou did not know, and Brantôme
only guessed at, were household words there. They in the Court
under-world knew all about that mysterious disease of which Gabrielle
d'Estrées died after eating a citron at Zamet's--all, more than we
know now or has ever been printed. That little prick of a knife which
made the second Wednesday in May, 1610, a day memorable in history,
was gossip down there a month before. Henry of Condé's death,
Mazarin's marriage, D'Eon's sex, Cagliostro's birth, were no mysteries
in the by-ways of the Louvre and Petit Trianon. He who wrote "Under
the king's hearthstone are many cockroaches" knew his world--a seamy,
ugly, vicious, dangerous world.

If any street in the Paris of that day belonged to it, the Rue
Touchet did; a little street a quarter of a mile from the Place
Royale, on the verge of the Quartier du Marais. The houses on one side
of the street had their backs to the river, from which they were
divided only by a few paces of foul foreshore. These houses were older
than the opposite row, were irregularly built, and piled high with
gables and crooked chimneys. Here and there a beetle-browed passage
led beneath them to the river; and one out of every two was a tavern,
or worse. A fencing-school and a gambling-hell occupied the two
largest. To the south-west the street ended in a _cul-de-sac_, being
closed by a squat stone house, built out of the ruins of an old water
gateway that had once stood there. The windows of this house were
never unshuttered, the door was seldom opened in the daylight. It was
the abode of Solomon Nôtredame. Once a week or so the astrologer's
sombre figure might be seen entering or leaving, and men at tavern
doors would point at him, and slatternly women, leaning out of window,
cross themselves. But few in the Rue Touchet knew that the house had a
second door, which did not open on the water, as the back doors of the
riverside houses did, but on a quiet street leading to it.

M. Nôtredame's house was, in fact, double, and served two sorts of
clients. Great ladies and courtiers, wives of the long robe and city
madams, came to the door in the quiet street, and knew nothing of the
Rue Touchet. Through the latter, on the other hand, came those who
paid in meal, if not in malt; lackeys and waiting-maids, and skulking
apprentices and led-captains--the dregs of the quarter, sodden with
vice and crime--and knowledge.

The house was furnished accordingly. The clients of the Rue Touchet
found the astrologer in a room divided into two by scarlet hangings,
so arranged as to afford the visitor a partial view of the farther
half, where the sullen glow of a furnace disclosed alembics and
crucibles, mortars and retorts, a multitude of uncouth vessels and
phials, and all the mysterious apparatus of the alchemist. Immediately
about him the shuddering rascal found things still more striking. A
dead hand hung over each door, a skeleton peeped from a closet. A
stuffed alligator sprawled on the floor, and, by the wavering
uncertain light of the furnace, seemed each moment to be awaking to
life. Cabalistic signs and strange instruments and skull-headed staves
were everywhere, with parchment scrolls and monstrous mandrakes, and a
farrago of such things as might impose on the ignorant; who, if he
pleased, might sit on a coffin, and, when he would amuse himself,
found a living toad at his foot! Dimly seen, crowded together,
ill-understood, these things were enough to overawe the vulgar, and
had often struck terror into the boldest ruffians the Rue Touchet
could boast.

From this room a little staircase, closed at the top by a strong door,
led to the chamber and antechamber in which the astrologer received
his real clients. Here all was changed. Both rooms were hung,
canopied, carpeted with black: were vast, death-like, empty. The
antechamber contained two stools, and in the middle of the floor a
large crystal ball on a bronze stand. That was all, except the silver
hanging lamp, which burned blue, and added to the funereal gloom of
the room.

The inner chamber, which was lighted by six candles set in sconces
round the wall, was almost as bare. A kind of altar at the farther end
bore two great tomes, continually open. In the middle of the floor was
an astrolabe on an ebony pillar, and the floor itself was embroidered
in white, with the signs of the Zodiac and the twelve Houses arranged
in a circle. A seat for the astrologer stood near the altar. And that
was all. For power over such as visited him here Nôtredame depended on
a higher range of ideas; on the more subtle forms of superstition, the
influence of gloom and silence on the conscience: and above all,
perhaps, on his knowledge of the world--_and them_.

Into the midst of all this came that shrinking, terrified little
mortal, Jehan. It was his business to open the door into the quiet
street, and admit those who called. He was forbidden to speak under
the most terrible penalties, so that visitors thought him dumb. For a
week after his coming he lived in a world of almost intolerable fear.
The darkness and silence of the house, the funereal lights and
hangings, the skulls and bones and horrid things he saw, and on which
he came when he least expected them, almost turned his brain. He
shuddered, and crouched hither and thither. His face grew white, and
his eyes took a strange staring look, so that the sourest might have
pitied him. It wanted, in a word, but a little to send the child stark
mad; and but for his hardy training and outdoor life, that little
would not have been wanting.

He might have fled, for he was trusted at the door, and at any moment
could have opened it and escaped. But Jehan never doubted his master's
power to find him and bring him back; and the thought did not enter
his mind. After a week or so, familiarity wrought on him, as on all.
The house grew less terrifying, the darkness lost its horror, the air
of silence and dread its first paralysing influence. He began to sleep
better. Curiosity, in a degree, took the place of fear. He fell to
poring over the signs of the Zodiac, and to taking furtive peeps into
the crystal. The toad became his playfellow. He fed it with
cockroaches, and no longer wanted employment.

The astrologer saw the change in the lad, and perhaps was not wholly
pleased with it. By-and-by he took steps to limit it. One day he found
Jehan playing with the toad with something of a boy's _abandon_,
making the uncouth creature leap over his hands, and tickling it with
a straw. The boy rose on his entrance, and shrank away; for his fear
of the man's sinister face and silent ways was not in any way
lessened. But Nôtredame called him back. "You are beginning to
forget," he said, eyeing the child grimly.

The boy trembled under his gaze, but did not dare to answer.

"Whose are you?"

Jehan looked this way and that. At length, with dry lips, he muttered,
"Yours."

"No, you are not," the man in black replied. "Think again. You have a
short memory."

Jehan thought and sweated. But the man would have his answer, and at
last Jehan whispered, "The devil's."

"That is better," the astrologer said coldly. "Do you know what this
is?"

He held up a glass bowl. The boy recognised it, and his hair began to
rise. But he shook his head.

"It is holy water," the man in black said, his small cruel eyes
devouring the boy. "Hold out your hand."

Jehan dared not refuse "This will try you," Nôtredame said slowly,
"whether you are the devil's or not. If not, water will not hurt you.
If so, if you are his for ever and ever, to do his will and pleasure,
then it will burn like fire!"

At the last word he suddenly sprinkled some with a brush on the boy's
hand. Jehan leapt back with a shriek of pain, and, holding the burned
hand to his breast, glared at his master with starting eyes.

"It burns," said the astrologer pitilessly, "It burns. It is as I
said. You are _his_. _His!_ After this I think you will remember. Now
go."

Jehan went away, shuddering with horror and pain. But the lesson had
not the precise effect intended. He continued to fear his master, but
he began to hate him also, with a passionate, lasting hatred strange
in a child. Though he still shrank and crouched in his presence,
behind his back he was no longer restrained by fear. The boy knew of
no way in which he could avenge himself. He did not form any plans to
that end, he did not conceive the possibility of the thing. But he
hated; and, given the opportunity, was ripe to seize it.


[Illustration: "JEHAN LEAPT BACK WITH A SHRIEK OF PAIN" (_p_. 74).]


He was locked in whenever Nôtredame went out; and in this way he spent
many solitary and fearful hours. These led him, however, in the end,
to a discovery. One day, about the middle of December, while he was
poking about the house in the astrologer's absence, he found a door. I
say "found," for though it was not a secret door, it was small and
difficult to detect, being placed in the side of the straight, narrow
passage at the head of the little staircase which led from the lower
to the upper chambers. At first he thought it was locked, but coming
to examine it more closely, though in mere curiosity, he found the
handle of the latch let into a hollow of the panel. He pressed this,
and the door yielded a little.

At the time the boy was scared. He saw the place was dark, drew the
door to the jamb again, and went away without satisfying his
curiosity. But in a little while the desire to know what was behind
the door overcame his terror. He returned with a taper, and, pressing
the latch again, pushed the door open and entered, his heart beating
loudly.

He held up his taper, and saw a very narrow, bare closet, made in the
thickness of the wall. And that was all, for the place was empty--the
one and only thing it contained being a soft, rough mat which covered
the floor. The boy stared fearfully about him, still expecting
something dreadful, but there was nothing else to be seen. And
gradually his fears subsided, and his curiosity with them, and he went
out again.

Another day, however, when he came into this place, he made a
discovery. Against either wall he saw a morsel of black cloth
fastened--a little flap a few inches long and three inches wide. He
held the light first to one and then to another of these, but he could
make nothing of them until he noticed that the lower edges were loose.
Then he raised one. It disclosed a long, narrow slit, through which he
could see the laboratory, with the fire burning dully, the phials
glistening, and the crocodile going through its unceasing pretence of
arousing itself. He raised the other, and found a slit there, too; but
as the chamber on that side--the room with the astrolabe--was in
darkness, he could see nothing. He understood, however. The closet was
a spying-place, and these were Judas-holes, so arranged that the
occupant, himself unheard and unseen, could see and hear all that
happened on either side of him.

It was the astrologer's custom to lock up the large room next the Rue
Touchet when he went out. For this reason, and because the place was
forbidden, the boy lingered at the Judas-hole, gazing into it. He knew
by this time most of the queer things it contained, and the red glow
of the furnace fire gave it, to his mind, a weird kind of comfort. He
listened to the ashes falling, and the ticking of some clockwork at
the farther end. He began idly to enumerate all the things he could
see; but the curtain which shut off the laboratory proper threw a
great shadow across the room, and this he strove in vain to pierce. To
see the better, he put out his light and looked again. He had scarcely
brought his eyes back to the slit, however, when a low grating noise
caught his ear. He started and held his breath, but before he could
stir a finger the heavy door which communicated with the Rue Touchet
slowly opened a foot or two, and the astrologer came in.

For a few seconds the boy remained gazing, afraid to breathe or move.
Then, with an effort, he dropped the cloth over the slit, and crept
softly away.




                              CHAPTER V.

                          THE UPPER PORTAL.


The astrologer was not alone. A tall figure, cloaked and muffled to
the chin, entered after him, and stood waiting at his elbow while he
secured the fastenings of the door. Apparently, they had only met on
the threshold, for the stranger, after looking round him and silently
noting the fantastic disorder of the room, said, in a hoarse voice,
"You do not know me?"

"Perfectly, M. de Vidoche," the astrologer answered, removing his hat.

"Did you know I was following you?"

"I came to show you the way."

"That is a lie, at any rate!" the young noble retorted, with a sneer,
"for I did not know I was coming myself."

"Until you saw me," the astrologer answered, unmoved. "Will you not
take off your cloak? You will need it when you leave."

M. de Vidoche complied with an ill grace. "The usual stock-in-trade, I
see," he muttered, looking round him scornfully. "Skulls and bones,
and dead hands and gibbet-ropes. Faugh! The place smells. I suppose
these are the things you keep to frighten children."

"Some," Nôtredame answered calmly--he was busy lighting a lamp--"and
some are for sale."

"For sale?" M. de Vidoche cried incredulously. "Who will buy them?"

"Some one thing, and some another," the astrologer answered
carelessly. "Take this, for instance," he continued, turning to his
visitor, and looking at him for the first time. "I expect to find a
customer for _that_ very shortly."

M. de Vidoche followed the direction of his finger, and shuddered,
despite himself. "That" was a coffin. "Enough of this," he said, with
savage impatience. "Suppose you get off your high horse, and come to
business. Can I sit, man, or are you going to keep me standing all
night?"

The man in black brought forward two stools, and led the way behind
the curtain. "It is warmer here," he said, pushing aside an earthen
pipkin, and clearing a space with his foot in front of the glowing
embers. "Now I am at your service, M. de Vidoche. Pray be seated."

"Are we alone?" the young noble asked suspiciously.

"Trust me for that," the astrologer answered. "I know my business."

But M. de Vidoche seemed to find some difficulty in stating his;
though he had evinced so high a regard for time a moment before. He
sat irresolute, stealing malevolent glances first at his companion,
and then at the dull, angry-looking fire. If he expected M. Nôtredame
to help him, however, he did not yet know his host. The astrologer sat
patiently waiting, with every expression, save placid expectation,
discharged from his face.

"Oh, d----n you!" the young man ejaculated at last. "Have you got
nothing to say? You know what I want," he added, with irritation, "as
well as I do."

"I shall be happy to learn," the astrologer answered politely.

"Give it me without more words, and let me go!"

The astrologer raised his eyebrows. "Alas! there is a limit to
omniscience," he said, shaking his head gently. "It is true we keep it
in stock--to frighten children. But it does not help me at present, M.
de Vidoche."

M. de Vidoche looked at him with an evil scowl. "I see; you want me to
commit myself," he muttered. The perspiration stood on his forehead,
and his voice was husky with rage or some other emotion. "I was a fool
to come here," he continued. "If you must have it, I want to kill a
cat; and I want something to give to it."

The astrologer laughed silently. "The mountain was in labour, and lo!
a cat!" he said, in a tone of amusement. "And lo! a cat! Well, in that
case I am afraid you have come to the wrong place, M. de Vidoche. I
don't kill cats. There is no risk in it, you see," he continued,
looking fixedly at his companion, "and no profit. Nobody cares about a
cat. The first herbalist you come to will give you what you want for a
few sous. Even if the creature turns black within the hour, and its
mouth goes to the nape of its neck," he went on, with a horrid smile,
"as Madame de Beaufort's did--_cui malo?_--no one is a penny the
worse. But if it were a question of---- I think I saw monsieur riding
in company with Mademoiselle de Farincourt to-day?"

M. de Vidoche, who had been contemplating his tormentor with eyes of
rage and horror, started at the unexpected question. "Well," he
muttered, "and what if I was?"

"Oh, nothing," the man in black answered carelessly. "Mademoiselle is
beautiful, and monsieur is a happy man if she smiles on him. But she
is high-born; and proud, I am told." He leaned forward as he spoke,
and warmed his long, lean hands at the fire. But his beady eyes never
left the other's face.

M. de Vidoche writhed under their gaze. "Curse you!" he muttered
hoarsely. "What do you mean?"

"Her family are proud also, I am told; and powerful. Friends of the
Cardinal too, I hear." The man in black's smile was like nothing save
the crocodile's.

M. de Vidoche rose from his seat, but sat down again.

"He would avenge the honour of the family to the death," continued the
astrologer gently. "To the death, I should say. Don't you think so, M.
de Vidoche?"

The perspiration stood in thick drops on the young man's forehead, and
he glared at his tormentor. But the latter met the look placidly, and
seemed ignorant of the effect he was producing. "It is a pity,
therefore, monsieur is not free to marry," he said, shaking his head
regretfully--"a great pity. One does not know what may happen. Yet, on
the other hand, if he had not married he would be a poor man now."

M. de Vidoche sprang to his feet with an oath. But he sat down again.

"When he married he _was_ a poor man, I think," the astrologer
continued, for the first time averting his gaze from the other's
face, and looking into the fire with a queer smile. "And in debt.
Madame--the present Madame de Vidoche, I mean--paid his debts, and
brought him an estate, I believe."

"Of which she has never ceased to remind him twice a day since!" the
young man cried in a terrible voice. And then in a moment he lost all
self-control, all disguise, all the timid cunning which had marked him
hitherto. He sprang to his feet. The veins in his temples swelled, his
face grew red. So true is it that small things try us more than great
ones, and small grievances rub deeper raws than great wrongs. "My
God!" he said between his teeth, "if you knew what I have suffered
from that woman! Pale-faced, puling fool, I have loathed her these
five years, and I have been tied to her and her whining ways and her
nun's face! Twice a day? No, ten times a day, twenty times a day, she
has reminded me of my debts, my poverty, and my straits before I
married her! And of her family! And her three marshals! And her----"

He stopped for very lack of breath. "Madame was of good family?" the
man in black said abruptly. He had grown suddenly attentive. His
shadow on the wall behind him was still and straight-backed.

"Oh, yes," the husband answered bitterly.

"In Perigord?'

"Oh, yes."

"Three marshals of France?" M. Nôtredame murmured thoughtfully; but
there was a strange light in his eyes, and he kept his face carefully
averted from his companion. "That is not common! That is certainly
something to boast of!"

"_Mon Dieu!_ She did boast of it, though no one else allowed the
claim. And of her blood of Roland!" M. de Vidoche cried, with scorn.
His voice still shook, and his hands trembled with rage. He strode up
and down.

"What was her name before she married?" the astrologer asked, stooping
over the fire.

The young man stopped, arrested in his passion--stopped, and looked at
him suspiciously. "Her name?" he muttered. "What has that to do with
it?"

"If you want me to--draw her horoscope," the astrologer replied, with
a cunning smile, "I must have something to go upon."

"Diane de Martinbault," the young man answered sullenly; and then, in
a fresh burst of rage, he muttered, "Diane! _Diable!_"

"She inherited her estates from her father?"

"Yes."

"Who had a son? A child who died young?" the astrologer continued
coolly.

M. de Vidoche looked at him. "That is true," he said sulkily. "But I
do not see what it has to do with you."

For answer, the man in black began to laugh, at first silently, then
aloud--a sly devil's laugh, that sounded more like the glee of fiends
sporting over a lost soul than any human mirth, so full was it of
derision and mockery and insult. He made no attempt to check or
disguise it, but rather seemed to flout it in the other's face; for
when the young noble asked him, with fierce impatience, what it was,
and what he meant, he did not explain. He only cried, "In a moment! In
a moment, noble sir, I swear you shall have what you want. But--ha!
ha!" And then he fell to laughing again, more loudly and shrilly than
before.

M. de Vidoche turned white and red with rage. His first thought was
that a trap had been laid for him, and that he had fallen into it;
that to what he had said there had been witnesses; and that now the
astrologer had thrown off the mask. With a horrible expression of
shame and fear on his countenance he stood at bay, peering into the
dark corners, of which there were many in that room, and plumbing the
shadows. When no one appeared and nothing happened, his fears passed,
but not his rage. With his hand on his sword, he turned hotly on his
confederate. "You dog!" he said between his teeth, and his eyes
gleamed dangerously in the light of the lamp, "know that for a
farthing I would slit your throat! And I will, too, if you do not this
instant stop that witch's grin of yours! Are you going to do what I
ask, or are you not?"

"Chut! chut!" the astrologer answered, waving his hand in deprecation.
"I said so, and I am always as good as my word."

"Ay, but now--now!" the young man retorted furiously. "You have played
with me long enough. Do you think that I am going to spend the night
in this charnel-house of yours?"

M. Nôtredame began to fear that he had carried his cruel amusement too
far. He had enjoyed himself vastly, and made an unexpected discovery:
one which opened an endless vista of mischief and plunder to his
astute gaze. But it was not his policy to drive his customer to
distraction, and he changed his tone. "Peace, peace," he said,
spreading out his hands humbly. "You shall have it now; now, this
instant. There is only one little preliminary."

"Name it!" the other said imperiously.

"The price. A horoscope, with the House of Death in the ascendant--the
Upper Portal, as we call it--is a hundred crowns, M. de Vidoche. There
is the risk, you see."

"You shall have it. Give me the--the stuff!"

The young man's voice trembled, but it was with anger and impatience,
not with fear. The astrologer recognised the change in him, and fell
into his place. He went, without further demur, to a little shelf in
the darkest corner of the laboratory, whence he reached down a
crucible. He was in the act of peering into this, with his back to his
visitor, when M. de Vidoche uttered a startled cry, and, springing
towards him, seized his arm. "You fiend!" the young man hissed--he was
pale to the lips, and shook as with an ague--"there is someone there!
There is someone listening!"


[Illustration: "FOR A SECOND THE MAN IN BLACK STOOD BREATHLESS" (_p_.
92).]


For a second the man in black stood breathless, his hand arrested, the
shadow of his companion's terror darkening his face. M. de Vidoche
pointed with a trembling finger to the staircase which led to the
farther part of the house, and on this the two bent their sombre,
guilty eyes. The lamp burned unsteadily, giving out an odour of smoke.
The room was full of shadows, uncouth distorted shapes, that rose and
fell with the light, and had something terrifying in their sudden
appearances and vanishings. But in all the place there was nothing so
appalling or so ugly as the two vicious, panic-stricken faces that
glared into the darkness.

The man in black was the first to break the silence. "What did you
hear?" he muttered at length, after a long, long period of waiting and
watching.

"Someone moved there," Vidoche answered, under his breath. His voice
still trembled; his face was livid with terror.

"Nonsense!" the other answered. He knew the place, and was fast
recovering his courage. "What was the sound like, man?"

"A dull, heavy sound. Someone moved."

M. Nôtredame laughed, but not pleasantly. "It was the toad," he said.
"There is no other living thing here. The door on the staircase is
locked. It is thick, too. A dozen men might be behind it, yet they
would not hear a word that passed in this room. But come; you shall
see."

He led the way to the farther end of the room, and, moving some of the
larger things, showed M. de Vidoche that there was no one there.
Still, the young man was only half-convinced. Even when the toad was
found lurking in a skull which had rolled to the floor, he continued
to glance about him doubtfully. "I do not think it was that," he said.
"Are you sure that the door is locked?"

"Try it," the astrologer answered curtly.

M. de Vidoche did, and nodded. "Yes," he said. "All the same, I will
get out of this, Give me the stuff, will you?"

The man in black raised the lamp in one hand, and with the other
selected from the crucible two tiny yellow packets. He stood a moment,
weighing them in his hand and looking lovingly at them, and seemed
unwilling to part with them. "They are power," he said, in a voice
that was little above a whisper. The alarm had tried even his nerves,
and he was not quite himself. "The greatest power of all--death. They
are the key of the Upper Portal--the true Pulvis Olympicus. Take one
to-day, one to-morrow, in liquid, and you will feel neither hunger,
nor cold, nor want, nor desire any more for ever. The late King of
England took one; but there, it is yours, my friend."

"Is it painful?" the young man whispered, shuddering, and with eyes
averted.

The tempter grinned horribly. "What is that to you?" he said. "It will
not bring her mouth to the back of her neck. That is enough for you to
know."

"It will not be detected?"

"Not by the bunglers they call doctors," the astrologer answered
scornfully. "Blind bats! You may trust me for that. Of what did the
King of England die? A tertian ague. So will madame. But if you
think----"

He stopped on a sudden, his hand in the air, and the two stood gazing
at one another with alarm printed on their faces. The loud clanging
note of a bell, harshly struck in the house, came dolefully to their
ears "What is it?" M. de Vidoche muttered uneasily.

"A client," the astrologer answered quietly. "I will see. Do not stir
until I come back to you."

M. de Vidoche made an impatient movement towards the door in the Rue
Touchet: and doubtless he would much have preferred to be gone at
once, since he had now got what he wanted. But the man in black was
already unlocking the door at the head of the little staircase, and
uttering a querulous oath M. de Vidoche resigned himself to wait. With
a dark look he hid the powders on his person.

                          *   *   *   *   *

He thought himself alone. But all the same a white-faced boy lay
within a few feet of him, watching his every movement, and listening
to his breathing--a small boy, instinct with hate and loathing.
Impunity renders people careless, or M. Nôtredame would not have been
so ready to set down the noise his confederate made to the toad. The
Judas-hole and the spying-place would have come to mind, and in a
trice he would have caught the listener in the act, and this history
would never have been written.

For Jehan, though his master's first entrance and appearance had sent
him fleeing, breathless and panic-stricken, from his post, had not
been able to keep aloof long. The house was dull, silent, dark; only
in the closet was amusement to be found. So while terror dragged him
one way, curiosity haled him the other, and at last had the victory.
He listened and shivered at the head of the stairs until that shrill
eldritch peal of laughter in which the astrologer indulged, and for
which he was destined to pay dearly, penetrated even the thick door.
Then he could hold out no longer. His curiosity grew intolerable.
Laughter! Laughter in that house! Slowly and stealthily the boy opened
the door of the dark closet, and crept in. Just across the threshold
he stumbled over the extinguished taper, and this it was which caused
M. de Vidoche's alarm.

Jehan fancied himself discovered, and lay sweating and trembling until
the search for the toad was over. Then he sat up, and, finding himself
safe, began to listen. What he heard was not clear, nor perfectly
intelligible; but gradually there stole even into his boyish mind a
perception of something horrible. The speakers' looks of fear, their
low tones and dark glances, the panic which seized them when they
fancied themselves overheard, and their relief when nothing came of
it, did more to bring the conviction home to his mind than their
words. Even of these he caught enough to assure him that someone was
to be poisoned--to be put out of the world. Only the name of the
victim--that escaped him.

                          *   *   *   *   *

Probably M. de Vidoche, left to himself, found, his thoughts poor
company, for by-and-by he grew restless. He walked across the room and
listened, and walked again and listened. The latter movement brought
him by chance to the foot of the little flight of six steps by which
the astrologer had retired, and he looked up and saw that the door at
the top was ajar. Impelled by curiosity, or suspicion, or the mere
desire to escape from himself, he stole up, and, opening it farther,
thrust his head through and listened.

He remained in this position about a minute. Then he turned, and crept
down again, and stood, thinking, at the foot of the stairs, with an
expression of such utter and complete amazement on his face as almost
transformed the man. Something he had heard or seen which he could not
understand! Something incredible, something almost miraculous! For all
else, even his guilty purpose, seemed swallowed up in sheer
astonishment.

The stupor held him until he heard the astrologer's steps. Even then
he only turned and looked. But if ever dumb lips asked a question, his
did then.

The man in black nodded silently. He seemed not at all surprised that
the other had heard or seen what he had. Even in him the thing,
whatever it was, had worked a change. His eyes shone, his eyebrows
were raised, his face wore a pale smile of triumph and conceit.

M. de Vidoche found his voice at last "My wife!" he whispered.

The astrologer's shoulders went up to his ears. He spread out his
hands. He nodded--once, twice. "_Mais oui, Madame!_" he said.

"Here?--now?" M. de Vidoche stammered, his eyes wide with
astonishment.

"She is in the chamber of the astrolabe."

"_Mon Dieu!_" the husband exclaimed. "_Mon Dieu!_" And then for a
moment he shook, as if someone were passing over his grave. His face
was pale. There was dread mingled with his surprise. "I do not
understand," he muttered at last. "What does it mean? What is she
doing here?"

"She has come for a love-philtre," M. Nôtredame answered, with a
sphinx-like smile.

"For whom?"

"For you."

The husband drew a deep breath. "For me?" he exclaimed. "Impossible!"

"Possible," the man in black answered quietly; "and true."

"Then what shall you do?"

"Give her one," the astrologer answered. The enigmatical smile, which
had been all along playing on his face, grew deeper, keener, more
cruel. His eyes gleamed with triumph--and evil. "I shall give her
one," he said again.

"But--what will she do with it?" M. de Vidoche muttered.

"_Take it!_ You fool, cannot you understand?" the man in black
answered sharply. "Give me back the powders. I shall give them to her.
She will take them--_herself_. You will be saved--all!"

M. de Vidoche reeled. "My God!" he cried. "I think you are the devil!"

"Perhaps," the man in black answered "but give me the powders."




                              CHAPTER VI.

                      THE POWDER OF ATTRACTION.


Meanwhile, a few yards away, in the room of the astrolabe, Madame de
Vidoche sat, waiting and trembling, afraid to move from the spot where
the astrologer had placed her, and longing for his return. The minutes
seemed endless, the house a grave. The silence and mystery which
wrapped her round, the sombre hangings, the burning candles, the
cabalistic figures filled her with awe and apprehension. She was a
timid woman; nothing but that last and fiercest hunger of all, the
hunger for love, could have driven her to this desperate step or
brought her here. But she was here, it had brought her; and though
fear blanched her cheek, and her limbs shook under her, and she dared
not pray--for what was this she was doing?--she did not repent, or
wish the step untaken, or go back on her desire.

The place was dreadful to her; but not so dreadful as the cold home,
the harsh words, the mockery of love, the slowly growing knowledge
that there never had been love, from which she was here to escape. She
was alone, but not more lonely than she had been for months in her own
house. The man who daily met her with gibes and taunts, and seldom
spoke without reminding her how pale and colourless she showed beside
the florid witty beauties of the Court--_his friends_--was still her
all, and had been her idol. If he failed her, the world was empty
indeed. Only one thing remained therefore; by hook or crook, by all a
woman might do or dare, by submission, by courage, to win back his
love. She had tried. God knows she had tried! She had knelt to him,
and he had struck her. She had dressed and been gay, and striven to
jest as his friends jested: he had scourged her with a cutting sneer.
She had prayed, and Heaven had not answered. She had turned from
Heaven--a white-faced, pining woman, little more than a girl--and she
was here.

Only let the man be quick! Let him be quick and give her what she
sought; and then scarcely any price he could ask should strain her
gratitude. At last she heard his step, and in a moment he came in.
Against the black background, and seen by the gloomy light of the
candles, he looked taller, leaner, paler, more sombre than life. His
eyes glowed with unnatural lustre. Madame shuddered as he came towards
her; and he saw it, and grinned behind his cadaverous mask.

"Madame," he said gravely, bowing his head, "it is as I hoped. Venus
is in the ascendant for nine days from to-day, and in fortunate
conjunction with Mars. I am happy that you come to me at a time so
propitious. A very little effort at this season will suffice. But it
is necessary, if you would have the charm work, to preserve the most
absolute silence and secrecy in regard to it."

Her lips were dry, her tongue seemed to cleave to her mouth. She felt
shame as well as fear in this man's presence. But she made an effort,
and muttered, "It will work?"

"I will answer for it!" he replied bluntly, a world of dubious meaning
in his tone and eyes. "It is the powder of attraction, by the use of
which Diane de Poitiers won the love of the king, though she surpassed
him by twenty years; and Madame de Valentinois held the hearts of men
till her seventieth winter. Madame de Hautefort uses it. It is made of
liquid gold, etherealised and strengthened with secret drugs. I have
made up two packets, but it will be safer if madame will take both at
once, dissolved in good wine and before the expiration of the ninth
day."

Madame de Vidoche took the packets, trembling. A little red dyed her
pale cheeks. "Is that all?" she murmured, faintly.

"All, madame; except that when you drink it, you must think of your
husband," he answered. As he said this he averted his face; for, try
as he would, he could not check the evil smile that curled his lip.
_Dieu!_ Was ever so grim a jest known? Or so forlorn, so helpless, so
infantine a fool? He could almost find it in his heart to pity her. As
for her husband--ah, how he would bleed him when it was over!

"How much am I to pay you, sir?" she asked timidly, when she had
hidden away the precious packets in her bosom. She had got what she
wanted; she was panting to be gone.

"Twenty crowns," he answered, coldly. "The charm avails for nine
moons. After that----"

"I shall need more?" she asked; for he had paused.

"Well, no, I think not," he answered slowly--hesitating strangely,
almost stammering. "I think in your case, madame, the effect will be
lasting."

She had no clue to the fantastic impulse, the ghastly humour, which
inspired the words; and she paid him gladly. He would not take the
money in his hands, but bade her lay it on the great open book,
"because the gold was alloyed, and not virgin." In one or two other
ways he played his part; directing her, for instance, if she would
increase the strength of the charm, to gaze at the planet Venus for
half an hour each evening, but not through glass or with any metal on
her person. And then he let her out by the door which opened on the
quiet street.

"Madame has, doubtless, her woman, or some attendant?" he said,
looking up and down. "Or I----"

"Oh, yes, yes!" she answered, gasping in the cold night air. "She is
here. Goodnight, sir."

He muttered some words in a strange tongue, and, as Madame de
Vidoche's attendant came out of the shadow to meet her, turned and
went in again.

The night was dark as well as cold, but madame, in the first fervour
of her spirits, did not heed it. She suffered her maid to wrap her up
warmly, and draw the cloak more closely round her throat; but she was
scarcely conscious of the attention, and bore it as a child might--in
silence. Her eyes shone in the darkness; her heart beat with a soft
subtle joy. She had the charm--the key to happiness! It was in her
bosom; and every moment, under cover of the cloak and night, her
fingers flew to it and assured her it was safe. The scruples with
which she had contemplated the interview troubled her no longer. In
her joy and relief that the ordeal was over and the philtre gained,
she knew no doubt, no suspicion. She lived only for the moment when
she might put the talisman to the test, and see love wake again in
those eyes which, whether they smiled or scowled, fate had made the
lodestones of her life.

The streets, by reason of the cold, were quiet enough. No one remarked
the two women as they flitted along under cover of the wall.
Presently, however, the bell of a church close at hand began to ring
for service, and the sound, startling madame, brought her suddenly,
chillily, sharply, to earth again. She stopped. "What is that?" she
said. "It cannot be compline. It wants three hours of midnight."

"It is St. Thomas's Day," the woman with her answered.

"So it is," madame replied, moving on again, but more slowly. "Of
course; it is four days to Christmas. Don't they call him the Apostle
of Faith, Margot?"

"Yes, madame."

"To be sure," madame rejoined thoughtfully. "To be sure; yes, we
should have faith--we should have faith." And with that she buoyed
herself up again (as people will in certain moods, using the strangest
floats), and went on gaily, her feet tripping to the measure of her
heart, and her hand on the precious packet that was to change the
world for her. On the foullest mud gleams sometimes the brightest
phosphorescence: otherwise it were not easy to conceive how even
momentary happiness could come of the house in the Rue Touchet!

The two women had nearly reached the Church of St. Gervais by the
Grève, when the sound of a swift stealthy footstep coming along the
street behind them caught the maid's ear. It was not a reassuring
sound at night and in that place. The dark square of the Grève, swept
by the icy wind from the river, lay before them; and though a brazier,
surrounded by a knot of men belonging to the watch, burned in the
middle of the open, the two women were reluctant to show themselves
where they might meet with rudeness. Margot laid her hand on her
mistress's arm, and for a few seconds the two stood listening, with
thumping hearts. The step came on--a light, pattering step. Acting on
a common impulse the women turned and looked at one another. Then
slipping noiselessly into the shadow cast by the church porch, they
pressed themselves against the wall, and stood scarcely daring to
breathe.

But fortune was against them, or their follower's eye was keen beyond
the ordinary. They had not been there many seconds before he came
running up--a stooping figure, slight and short. He slackened speed
abruptly, and stopped exactly opposite their lurking-place. A moment
of suspense, and then a pale face, rendered visible by a gleam from
the distant fire, looked in on them, and a thin, panting voice
murmured timidly, "Madame! Madame de Vidoche, if you please!"


[Illustration: "'MADAME! MADAME DE VIDOCHE, IF YOU PLEASE!'" (_p_.
112)]


"Saint Siége!" madame's woman gasped, in a voice of astonishment. "I
declare it is a child!"

Madame almost laughed in her relief. "Ah!" she said, "how you
frightened us! I thought you were a man dogging us--a thief!"

"I am not," the boy said simply.

This time Margot laughed. "Who are you, then?" she asked, briskly
stepping out, "and why have you been following us? You seem to have my
lady's name pretty pat," she added, sharply.

"I want to speak to her," the boy answered, his lip trembling. In
truth, he was trembling all over with fear and excitement. But the
darkness hid that.

"Oh!" Madame de Vidoche said graciously. "Well, you may speak. But
tell me first who you are, and be quick about it. It is cold and
late."

"I am from the house where you have been," Jehan answered bravely.
"You saw me at Les Andelys, too, when you were at supper, madame. I
was the boy at the door. I want to speak to you alone, please."

"Alone!" madame exclaimed.

The boy nodded firmly. "If you please," he said.

"Hoity-toity!" Margot exclaimed; and she was for demurring. "He only
wants to beg," she said.

"I don't!" the boy cried, with tears in his voice.

"Then it is a present he wants!" she rejoined, scornfully. "They
expect their vales at those places. And we are to freeze while he
makes a tale."

But madame, out of pity or curiosity, would hear him. She bade the
woman wait a few paces away. And when they were alone: "Now," she said
kindly, "what is it? You must be quick, for it is very cold."

"_He_ sent me after you--with a message," Jehan answered.

Madame started, and her hand went to the packet. "Do you mean M.
Nôtredame?" she murmured.

The boy nodded. "He--he said he had forgotten one thing," he
continued, halting between his sentences and shivering. "He--he said
you were to alter one thing, madame."

"Oh!" Madame answered frigidly, her heart sinking, her pride roused by
this intervention of the boy, who seemed to know all. "What thing, if
you please?"

Jehan looked quickly and fearfully over his shoulder. But all was
quiet. "He said he had forgotten that your husband was dark," he
stammered.

"Dark!" madame muttered in astonishment.

"Yes, dark-complexioned," Jehan continued desperately. "And that being
so, you were not to take the--the charm yourself."

Madame's eyes flashed with anger. "Oh!" she said, "indeed! And is that
all?"

"But to give it to him, without telling him," the boy rejoined, with
sudden spirit and firmness.

Madame started and drew a deep breath. "Are you sure you have made no
mistake?" she said, trying to read the boy's face. But it was too dark
for that.

"Quite sure," he answered hardily.

"Oh," madame said, slowly and thoughtfully; "very well. Is that all?"

"That is all," he replied, drawing back a step; but reluctantly, as it
seemed.

Margot, who had been all the time moving a little nearer and a little
nearer, came right up at this. "Now, my lady," she said sharply, "I
beg you will have done. This is no place for us at this time of night,
and this little imp of Satan ought to be about his business. I am sure
I am perishing with cold, and the sound of those creaking boats on the
river makes me think of nothing but gibbets and corpses, till I have
got the creeps all down my back! And the watch will be here
presently."

"Very well, Margot," madame answered; "I am coming." But still she
looked at the boy and lingered. "You are sure there is nothing else?"
she murmured.

"Nothing," he answered.

She thought his manner odd, and wondered why he lingered; why he did
not hurry off, since the night was cold and he was bareheaded. But
Margot pressed her again, and she turned, saying reluctantly, "Very
well, I am coming."

"Ay, and so is Christmas!" the woman grumbled. And this time she
fairly took her by the arm and hurried her away.

"That is not a good retort, Margot!" madame said presently, when they
had gone a few paces, and were flitting hand-in-hand across the Grève,
with heads bent to the wind, "for it wants only four days to
Christmas. You had forgotten that!"

"I think you are fey, my lady!" the woman replied, in an ill-temper.
"I have not seen you so gay these twelve months; and what with the
cold, and fear of the watch and monsieur, I am ready to sink. You must
have heard fine news down there."

But madame did not answer. She was thinking of last Christmas. Her
husband had gone to the revels at the Palais Cardinal, which was then
in building. She had offered to go with him, and he had told her, with
an oath, that if she did she should remember it. So she had stopped at
home alone--her first Christmas in Paris. She had gone to mass, and
then had sat all day in the cold, splendid house, and cried. Half the
servants had played truant, and her woman had been cross, and for
hours together no one had gone near her.

This Christmas it was to be different.

Madame's eyes began to shine again, and her heart to beat a pleasant
measure. If she had her will, they would go to no pageants or
merry-makings. But then he liked such things, and showed to advantage
in them. Yes, they would go, and she would sit quiet as a mouse; and
listening while they praised him, would feed all the time on the sweet
knowledge that now he was hers--her own.

She had not done dreaming when they reached the house. The porter was
drowsing in his lodge, the gate was ajar. They slipped into the dark
silent courtyard, and, flitting across it, entered the house. Two
servants lay stretched asleep in the hall, and in a little room to the
left of the door they could hear others talking; but no one looked
out. Fortune could not have aided them better. With a little laugh of
relief and thankfulness madame tripped up the grand staircase and
under the great lamp which lit it and the hall.

Marmot followed, but neither she nor her mistress saw who followed
them: who had followed them across the windy Grève, through street and
lane and byway; even, after a moment's hesitation, over the threshold
of the court and into the house. A servant who heard the stairs creak
as they went up, and looked out, fancied he saw a small black figure
glide out of sight above; but as there were no children in the house,
and this was a child, if anything, he thought his eyes deceived
him--he was half-asleep--and, crossing himself, went back, yawning.

The boy could never quite explain--though often asked in
after-years--what led him to run this risk. It is true he dared not
return to the Rue Touchet; and he was only twelve years old, and knew
nowhere else to go. But---- However, that is all that can be said. He
did follow them.

He paused at the head of the stairs, and stood shivering under the
great lamp. In front of him hung a pair of heavy curtains. After a
moment's hesitation he crept between them and found himself in a
splendid apartment, spacious though sparely furnished, lit from
the roof, and in character half-hall, half-parlour. A high marble
chimney-piece in the new Italian mode faced him, and on either hand
were two lofty doorways screened by curtains. The floor was of
parquet, the walls were panelled in chestnut wood. On each side of the
fire, which smouldered low between the dogs and was nearly out, a long
bench, velvet-covered, ran along the wall. A posset-cup stood on a
tripod on the hearth, and in the middle of the room a marble table
bore a dish of sweetmeats and a tray of flasks and glasses. In that
day, when people dined at eleven and supped at six, it was customary
to take _les épices et le vin du coucher_ before retiring at nine.

The boy stood cowering and listening--a strange, pale-faced little
figure, reflected in a narrow mirror which decked one wall. It was
very cold even here; outside he must die of cold. He heard the two
women moving and talking in one of the rooms on the left; otherwise
the house was still. He looked about, hesitated, and at last stole on
tip-toe across the floor to one of the doors on his right. The curtain
which hid it trailed a yard on the ground. He sat down between it and
the door, and, winding one corner of the thick heavy stuff round his
frozen limbs, uttered a sigh of relief. He had found a refuge of a
kind.

He meant to sleep, but he could not, for all his nerves were tense
with excitement. Not a sound in the house escaped him. He heard the
soft ashes sink on the hearth; he heard one of the men who slept in
the hall turn and moan in his sleep. At last, quite close to him, a
door opened.

Jehan moved a little and peered from his ambush. The noise had come
from madame's room. He was not surprised when he saw her face thrust
out. Presently she put the curtain quite aside and came out, and stood
a little way from him, listening intently. She wore a loose robe of
some soft stuff, and he fancied she was barefoot, for she moved
without noise.

She stood listening a full minute, with her hand to her bosom. Then
she nodded, as if assured that all was well, and, going to the table,
looked down at the things it held. Her face wore a subtle smile, her
cheeks flamed softly, there was a shy sparkle in her eyes. The lamp
seemed to lend her new loveliness.

Apparently she did not find what she wanted on the table, for in a
moment she turned and went to the fireplace. She took the posset from
the trivet, and, lifting the lid of the cup, looked in. What she saw
appeared to satisfy her, for with a quick movement she carried the cup
to the table and set it down open. She had her back to Jehan now, and
he could not see what she was doing, though he watched her every
motion and partly guessed. When she had finished whatever it was, she
raised the cup to her lips, and the boy's heart stood still. Ay, stood
still! He half rose, his face white. But he was in error. She only
kissed the wine and covered it, and took it back to the trivet,
murmuring something over it as she set it down.


[Illustration: HE WATCHED HER EVERY MOTION "(_p_. 124).]


The boy lay still, like one fascinated, while madame, clasping two
little silk bags to her bosom, stole back to her door. As she raised
the curtain with one hand she turned on a sudden impulse and kissed
the other towards the hearth. Slowly the curtain fell and hid her
shining eyes.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                            CLYTÆMNESTRA.


She had barely disappeared when the boy, listening eagerly, heard
the great door below flung open, and instinctively sank down again.
A breath of cold air rose from below. A harsh voice--a voice he
knew--cursed someone or something in the hall, a heavy step came
stumbling up the stairs, and in a moment M. de Vidoche, followed by a
sleepy servant, pushed his way through the curtains. He was flushed
with drink, yet he was not drunk, for as he crossed the floor he shot
a swift sidelong glance at his wife's door--a glance of dark meaning;
and, though he railed savagely at the servant for letting the fire go
out, he had the air of listening while he spoke, and swore, to show
himself at ease.

The man muttered some excuse, and, kneeling, began to blow the embers,
while Vidoche looked on moodily. He had not taken off his hat and
cloak. "Has madame been out this evening?" he said suddenly.

"No, my lord."

"Her woman is lying with her?"

"Yes, my lord."

A moment's silence. Then, "Trim the lamp, curse you! Don't you see it
is going out? Do you want to leave me in the dark? _Sacré!_ This might
be a pigsty from the way it is kept!"

The man was used to be kicked and abused, but it seemed to him that
his master's caprices were taking a fresh direction. It was not his
business to think, however. He trimmed the lamp and took the cloak and
hat, and was going, when Vidoche called him back again. "Put on a
log," he said, "and give me that drink. _Nom du diable_, it is cold!
You lazy hound, you have been sleeping!"

The man vowed he had not, and M. de Vidoche listened to his
protestations as if he heard them. In reality his thoughts were busy
with other things. Would it be tonight, or to-morrow, or the next day?
he was wondering darkly. And how would it--take her? Would he be
there, or would they come and tell him? Would she sicken and fade
slowly, and die of some common illness to all appearance, with the
priest by her side? Or would he awake in the night to hear her
screaming, and be summoned to see her writhing in torture, gasping,
choking, praying them to save--to save her from this horrible pain?
God! The perspiration broke out on his brow. He shivered. "Give me
that!" he muttered hoarsely, holding out a shaking hand. "Give it me,
I say!"

The man was warming the posset, but he rose hastily and handed it.

"Put lights in my room! And, hark you--you will sleep there to-night.
I am not well. Go and get your straw, and be quick about it."

Vidoche listened with the cup in his hand while the man went down and
fetched a taper and some coverings from the hall, and, coming up
again, opened one of the doors on the right--not the one against which
the boy lay. The servant went into the room and busied himself there
for a time, while the master sat crouching over the fire, thinking,
with a gloomy face. He tried to turn his thoughts to the Farincourt,
and to what would happen afterwards, and to a dozen things with which
his mind had been only too ready to occupy itself of late. But now
his thoughts would not be ordered. They returned again and again to
the door on his left. He caught himself listening, waiting, glancing
at it askance. And this might go on for days. _Dieu!_ the house would
be a hell! He would go away. He would make some excuse to leave
until--until after Christmas.

He shivered, cursed himself under his breath for a fool, and drank
half the mulled wine at a draught. As he took the cup from his lips,
his ear caught a slight sound behind him, and, starting, he peered
hastily over his shoulder. But the noise came apparently from the next
room, where the servant was moving about; and, with another oath,
Vidoche drained the cup and set it down on the table.

He had scarcely done so when he drew himself suddenly upright and
remained in that position for a moment, his mouth half open, his eyes
glaring. A kind of spasm seized him. His teeth shut with a click. He
staggered and clutched at the table. His face grew red--purple. His
brain seemed to be bursting; his eyes filled with blood. He tried to
cry, to give the alarm, to get breath, but his throat was held in an
iron vice. He was choking and reeling on his feet, when the man came
by chance out of the bedroom.

By a tremendous effort Vidoche spoke. "Who--made--this?" he muttered,
in a hissing voice.

The servant started, scared by his appearance. He answered,
nevertheless, that he had mixed it himself.

"Look at--the bottom of--the cup!" Vidoche replied in a terrible
voice. He was swaying to and fro, and kept himself up only by his grip
on the table. "Is there--anything there?"

