The servant was terribly frightened, but he had the sense to obey. He
took up the cup and looked in it. "Is there--a powder--in it?" Vidoche
asked, a frightful spasm distorting his features.

"There is--something," the man answered, his teeth chattering. "But
let me fetch help, my lord. You are not well. You are----"

"A dead man!" the baffled murderer cried, his voice rising in a scream
of indescribable despair and horror. "A dead man! I am poisoned! My
wife!" He reeled with that word. He lost his hold of the table. "Ha,
_mon Dieu!_ Mercy! Mercy!" he cried.

In a moment he was down, writhing on the floor, and uttering shriek on
shriek: cries so dreadful that on the instant doors flew open and
sleepers awoke, and in a twinkling the room--though the lamp lay
quenched, overturned in his struggles--was full of lights and
frightened faces and huddled forms, and women who stopped their ears
and wept. The doorways framed more faces, the staircase rang with
sounds of alarm. Everywhere was turmoil and a madness of hurrying
feet. One ran for the doctor, another for the priest, a third for the
watch. The house seemed on a sudden alive; nay, the very courtyard,
where the porter was gone from his post, and the doors stood open, was
full of staring strangers, who gaped at the windows and the hurrying
lights, and asked whose was the hotel, or answered it was M. de
Vidoche's.


[Illustration: "IN A MOMENT HE WAS DOWN, WRITHING ON THE FLOOR" (_p_.
133).]


It had been. But already the man who had gone up the stairs so full of
strength and evil purpose lay dying, speechless, all but dead. They
had lifted him on to a pallet which someone drew from a neighbouring
room, and at first there had been no lack of helpers or ready hands.
One untied his cravat, and another his doublet, and two or three of
the coolest held him in his paroxysms. But then the magic word
"Poison!" was whispered; and one by one, all, even the man who had
been with him, even madame's woman, drew off, and left those two
alone. The livid body lay on the pallet, and madame, stunned and
horror-stricken, hung over it; but the servants stood away in a dense
circle, and looking on with gloom and fear in their faces, some
mechanically holding lights, some still grasping the bowls and basins
they were afraid to use, whispered that word again and again.

It seemed as if the tell-tale syllables passed the walls; for the
first to arrive, before doctor or priest, was the captain of the
watch. He came upstairs, his sword clanking, and, thrusting the
curtains aside, stood looking at the strange scene, which the many
lights, irregularly held and distributed, lit up as if it had been a
pageant on the stage. "Who is it?" he muttered, touching the nearest
servant on the arm.

"M. de Vidoche," the man answered.

"Is he dead?"

The man cringed before him. "Dead, or as good," he whispered. "Yes,
sir."

"Then he is not dead?"

"I do not know, sir."

"Then why the devil are you all standing like mutes at a funeral?" the
soldier answered, with an oath. "Leaving madame alone, too. Poison,
eh? Oh!" and he whistled softly. "So that is why you are all looking
on as if the man had got the plague, is it? A pretty set of curs you
are! But here is the doctor. Out of the way now," he added
contemptuously, "and let no one leave the room."

He went forward with the physician, and, while the latter knelt and
made his examination, the captain muttered a few words of comfort in
madame's ear. For all she heard or heeded, however, he might have
spared his pains. She had been summoned so abruptly, and the call had
so entirely snapped the thread of her thoughts, that she had not yet
connected her husband's illness with any act of hers. She had
absolutely forgotten the enterprise of the evening, its anticipations
and hopes. For the time she was spared that horror. But this illness
alone sufficed to overwhelm her, to sink her beyond the reach of
present comfort. She no longer remembered her husband's coldness, but
only the early days when he had come to her in her country home, a
black-bearded, bold-eyed Apollo, and wooed her impetuously and with
irresistible will. All his faults, all his unkindnesses, were
forgotten now: only his beauty, his vigour, his great passion, his
courage were remembered. A dreadful pain seized her heart when she
recognised that his had ceased to beat. She peered white-faced into
the physician's eyes, she hung on his lips. If she remembered her
journey to the Rue Touchet at all, it was only to think how futile her
hopes were now. He, whom she would have won back to her, was gone from
her for ever!

The doctor shook his head gravely as he rose. He had tried to bleed
the patient, without waiting, in this emergency, for a barber to be
summoned; but the blood would not flow. "It is useless," he said. "You
must have courage, madame. More courage than is commonly required," he
continued, in a tone of solemnity, almost of severity. He looked round
and met the captain's eyes. He made him a slight sign.

"He is dead?" she muttered.

"He is dead," the physician answered slowly. "More, madame--my task
goes farther. It is my duty to say that he has been poisoned."

"Dead!" she muttered, with a dry sob. "Dead!"

"Poisoned, I said, madame," the physician answered almost harshly. "In
an older man the symptoms might be taken for those of apoplexy. But in
this case not so. M. de Vidoche has been poisoned."

"You are clear on the point?" the captain of the watch said. He was a
grey-haired, elderly man, lately transferred from the field to the
slums of Paris, and his kindly nature had not been wholly obliterated
by contact with villainy.

"Perfectly," the doctor answered. "More, the poison must have been
administered within the hour."

Madame rose shivering from the dead man's side. This new terror, so
much worse than that of death, seemed to thrust her from him, to raise
a barrier between them. The soft white robe she had thrown round her
when she ran from her bed was not whiter than her cheeks; the lights
were not brighter than her eyes, distended with horror. "Poisoned!"
she muttered. "Impossible! Who would poison him?"

"That is the question, madame," the captain of the watch answered, not
without pity--not without admiration. "And if, as we are told, the
poison must have been given within the hour, it should not be
difficult to answer it. Let no one leave the room," he continued,
pulling his moustachios. "Where is the valet who waited on M. de
Vidoche?"

The man stood forward from the rest, shaking with alarm, and told
briefly all he knew; how he had left his master in his usual health,
and found him in some kind of seizure; how Vidoche had bidden him look
in the cup, and how he had found a sediment in it which should not
have been there.

"You mixed this wine yourself?" the captain of the watch said sharply.

The man allowed he had, whimpering and excusing himself.

"Very well. Let me see madame's woman," was the answer. "Which is she?
She is here, I suppose. Let her stand out."

A dozen hands were ready to point her out, a dozen lights were held up
that the Chevalier du Guet might see her the better. She was pushed,
nudged, impelled forward, until she stood trembling where the man had
stood. But not for long. The captain's first question was still on his
lips when, with a sudden gesture of despair, the woman threw herself
on her knees before him, and, grovelling in a state of abject terror,
cried out that she would tell all--all! All if they would let her go!
All if they would not torture her!

The captain's face grew stern, the lines about his mouth hardened.
"Speak!" he said curtly, and with a swift side-glance at the mistress,
who stood as if turned to stone. "Speak, but the truth only, woman!"
while a murmur of astonishment and fear ran round the circle.

It should be mentioned that at this time the crime of secret poisoning
was held in especial abhorrence in France, the poisoning of husbands
by wives more particularly. It was believed to be common; it was
suspected in many cases where it could not be proved. Men felt
themselves at the mercy of women who, sharing their bed and board,
had often the motive and always the opportunity; and in proportion as
the crime was easy of commission and difficult to detect was the
rigour with which it was rewarded when detected. The high rank of
the Princess of Cond√©--a Tremouille by birth and a Bourbon by
marriage--did not avail to save her from torture when suspected of
this; while the sudden death of a man of position was often sufficient
to expose his servants, and particularly his wife's confidante, to the
horrors of the question. Madame's woman knew all this. Such things
formed the gossip of her class, and in a paroxysm of fear, in terror,
in dread lest the moment should pass and another forestall her, she
flung both fidelity and prudence to the winds.

"I will! I will! All!" she cried. "And I swear it is true! She went
to a house in the Tournelles quarter to-night!"

"She? Who is she, woman?" the captain asked sharply.

"My lady there! She stayed an hour. I waited outside. As we came back
a boy ran after us, and talked with her by the porch of St. Gervais.
She sent me away, and I do not know what was his business. But after
we got home, and when she thought me asleep, she crept out of the room
and came here, and put something in that cup. I heard her go, and
stole to the door, and through the curtains saw her do it, but I did
not know what it was, or what she intended. I have told the truth. But
I did not know, I did not! I swear I did not!"

The captain silenced her protestations with a fierce gesture, and
turned from her to the woman she accused. "Madame," he said, in a low,
unsteady voice, "is this true?"

She stood with both her hands on her breast, and looked, with a face
of stone, not at him, but beyond him. She scarcely seemed to breathe,
so perfect was the dreadful stillness which held her. He thought she
did not hear: and he was about to repeat his question when she moved
her lips in a strange, mechanical fashion, and, after an effort,
spoke. "Is it true?" she whispered--in that stricken silence every
syllable was audible, and even at her first word some women fell to
shuddering--"is it true that I have killed my husband? Yes, I have
killed him. I loved him, and I have killed him. I loved him--I had no
one else to love--and I have killed him. God has let this be in this
world. You are real, and I am real. It is no dream. He has let it be."

"_Mon Dieu!_" the captain muttered, while one woman broke into noisy
weeping. "She is mad!"

But madame was not mad, or only mad for the moment. "It is strange,"
she continued, with writhing lips, but in the same even tone--which to
those who had ears to hear was worse than any loud outcry--"that such
a thing should be. God should not let it be, because I loved him. I
loved him, and I have killed him. I--but perhaps I shall awake
presently and find it a dream. Or perhaps he is not dead. Is he? Ha!
is he, man? Tell me!"

With the last words, which leapt from her lips in sudden frantic
questioning, she awoke as from a trance. She sprang towards the
doctor; then, turning swiftly, looked where the corpse lay, and with a
dreadful peal of laughter threw herself upon it. Her shrill cries so
filled the air, so rang through the empty hall below, so pierced the
brain, that the captain raised his hands to his ears, and the men
shrank back, looking at the women.

"See to her!" said the captain, stamping his foot in a rage and
addressing the physician. "I must take her away, but I cannot take her
like this. See to her, man. Give her something; drug her, poison her,
if you like--anything to stop her! Her cries will ring in my ears a
twelvemonth hence. Well, woman, what is it?" he continued impatiently.
Madame's woman had touched his arm.

"The boy!" she muttered. "The boy!" Her teeth were chattering with
terror. She pointed to the place where the servants stood most thickly
near the great curtains which shut off the staircase.

He followed the direction of her hand, but saw nothing except scared
faces and cringing figures. "What boy, woman?" he retorted. "What do
you mean?"

"The boy who came after us to the church," she answered. "I saw him a
minute ago--there! He was standing behind that man, looking under his
arm."

Three strides brought the captain of the watch to the place indicated.
But there was no boy there--there was no boy to be seen. Moreover, the
frightened servants who stood in that part declared that they had seen
no boy--that no boy could have been there. The captain, believing that
they had had eyes only for Madame de Vidoche, put small faith in their
protestations; but the fact remained that the boy was gone, and the
searcher returned baffled and perplexed: more than half inclined to
think that this might be a ruse on the woman's part, yet at a loss to
see what good it could do her. He asked her roughly how old the boy
was.

"About twelve," she answered, looking nervously over her shoulder. In
truth, she began to fancy that the boy was a familiar. Or what could
bring him here? How had he entered? And whither had he vanished?

"How was he dressed?" the captain asked angrily, waving back the
servants, who would have pressed on him in their curiosity.

"In black velvet," she answered. "But he had no cap. He was
bareheaded. And I noticed that he had black hair and blue eyes."

"Are you sure that the boy you saw here was the boy who followed you
and spoke to madame in the street?" he urged. "Be careful, woman!"

"I am certain of it," she answered feverishly. "I knew him in a
moment."

"Are you sure that madame did not bring him in with you?"

She vowed positively that she had not, and equally positively that the
boy could not have followed them in without being seen. In this we
know that she was mistaken; but she believed it, and her belief
communicated itself to her questioner.

He rubbed his head with his hand in extreme perplexity. If the boy
were a messenger from the villain whom this wretched woman had been to
visit, what could have brought him to the house? Why had he risked
himself on the scene of the murder? Unless--unless, indeed, his
mission were to learn what happened, and to warn his master!

The captain caught that in a moment, and, thrusting the servants on
one side, despatched three or four men on the instant to the Rue
Touchet, "_Pardieu!_" he exclaimed, wiping his forehead when they were
gone, "I was nearly forgetting him. The villain! I will be sworn he
tempted her! But now I think I have netted all--madame, the maid, the
man, the devil!" He ticked them off on his fingers. "There is only the
lad wanting. The odds are they will get him, too, in the Rue Touchet.
So far, so good. But it is hateful work," the old soldier continued,
with an oath, looking askance at the group which surrounded madame and
the doctor. "They will--ugh! it is horrible. It would be a mercy to
give her a dose now, and end all."

But there was no one to take the responsibility, and so the few who
were abroad very early that morning saw a strange and mournful
procession pass through the streets of Paris; those streets which have
seen so many grisly and so many fantastic things. An hour before
daybreak a litter, surrounded by a crowd of armed men, some bearing
torches and some pikes and halberds, came out of the Hotel Vidoche and
passed slowly down the Rue St. Denis. The night was at its darkest,
the wind at its keenest. Vagrant wretches, lying out in the Halles,
rose up and walked for their lives, or slowly froze and perished.

But there are worse things than death in the open; worse, at any rate,
than that death which comes with kindly numbing power. And some of
these knew it; nay, all. The poorest outcast whom the glare of the
cressets surprised as he lurked in porch or penthouse, the leanest
beggar who looked out startled by the clang and tramp, knew himself
happier than the king's prisoner bound for the Ch√¢telet; and, hugging
his rags, thanked Heaven for it.




                            CHAPTER VIII.

                          THE MARK OF CAIN.


When Jehan, in a fever of indignation, slipped stealthily out of the
house in the Rue Touchet and sped up the dark, quiet street after
Madame de Vidoche, he had no subtler purpose in his mind than to
overtake her and warn her. The lady had spoken kindly to him on the
night of the supper at Les Andelys. She was young, weak, oppressed;
the plot against her seemed to the child to be fiendish in its
artfulness. It needed no more to rouse every chivalrous instinct in
his nature--and these in a boy should be many, or woe betide the
man--and determine him to save her.

He thought that if he could overtake her and warn her all would be
well; and at first his purpose went no farther than that. But as he
ran, now looking over his shoulder in terror, and now peering into the
darkness ahead, sometimes slipping into the gutter in his haste, and
sometimes stumbling over a projecting step, a new and whimsical
thought flashed into his mind, and in a moment fascinated him. How it
came to one so young, whether the astrologer's duplicity, to which he
had been a witness, suggested it, or it sprang from some precocious
aptitude in the boy's own nature, it is impossible to say. But on a
sudden there it was in his mind, full-grown, full-armed, a perfect
scheme. He had only a few minutes in which to consider it before he
caught madame up, and the time to put it into execution came; but in
that interval he found no flaw in it. Rather he revelled in it. It
satisfied the boy's stern sense of retribution and justice. It more
than satisfied the boy's love of mischief and trickery.

He felt not the slightest misgiving, therefore, when it came to
playing his part. He went through it without pity, without a scruple
or thought of responsibility--nay, he followed madame home, and hid
himself behind the curtain, with no feeling of apprehension as to what
was coming, with no qualms of conscience.

But when he had seen all, and lying spell-bound in his hiding-place
had witnessed the tragedy, when covering his ears with his hands,
and cowering down as if he would cower through the floor, he had
heard Vidoche's death-cry and winced at each syllable of madame's
heart-broken utterance--when, with quaking limbs and white cheeks, he
had crept at last down the stairs and fled from the accursed house,
then the boy knew all; knew what he had done, and was horror-stricken!
Even the darkness and freezing cold were welcome, if he might escape
from that house--if he might leave those haunting cries behind. But
how? by what road? He fled through street after street, alley after
alley, over bridges, and along quays, by the doors of churches and the
gates of prisons. But everywhere the sights and sounds went with him,
forestalled him, followed him. He could not forget. When at last,
utterly exhausted, he flung himself down on a pile of refuse in a
distant corner of the Halles, his heart seemed bursting. He had killed
a man. He had worse than killed a woman. He would be hung. The
astrologer had told him truly; he was doomed, given up to evil and the
devil!

He lay for a long time panting and shuddering, with his face hidden;
while a burst of agony, provoked by some sudden pang of remembrance,
now and again racked his frame. The spot he had, almost unconsciously,
chosen for his hiding-place was a corner between two stalls, at the
east end of the market: an angle well sheltered from the wind, and
piled breast-high with porters' knots and rubbish. The air was a
little less bitter there than outside; and by good fortune he had
thrown himself down on an old sack, which he, by-and-bye, drew over
him. Otherwise he must have perished. As it was, he presently sobbed
himself into an uneasy slumber; but only to awake in a few minutes
with a scream of affright and a dismal return of all his
apprehensions.

Still, nature was already at work to console him; and misery sleeps
proverbially well. After a time he dozed again for a few minutes, and
then again. At length, a little before daybreak, he went off into a
sounder sleep, from which he did not awake until the wintry sun was
nearly an hour up, and old-fashioned people were thinking of dinner.

After opening his eyes, he lay a while between sleeping and waking,
with the sense of some unknown trouble heavy upon him. On a sudden a
voice, a harsh, rasping voice, speaking a strange clipped jargon,
roused him effectually. "He is a runaway!" the voice said, with two or
three unnecessary oaths. "A crown to a penny on it, my bully-boys!
Well, it is an ill-wind blows no one any good. Rouse up the little
shaveling, will you? That is not the way! Here, lend it me."

The next moment the boy sat up, with a cry of pain, for a heavy
porter's knot fell on his shin-bone and nearly broke it. He found
himself confronted by three or four grinning ruffians, whose eyes
glistened as they scanned his velvet clothes and the little silver
buttons that fastened them. The man who had spoken before seemed to be
the leader of the party: a filthy beggar with one arm and a hare-lip.
"Ho! ho!" he chuckled; "so you can feel, M. le Marquis, can you! Flesh
and blood like other folk. And doubtless with money in your pockets to
pay for your night's lodging."

He hauled the child to him and passed his hands through his clothes.
But he found nothing, and his face grew dark. "_Morbleu!_" he swore.
"The little softy has brought nothing away with him!"

The other men, gathering round, glared at the boy hungrily. In the
middle of the Forest of Bondy he could not have been more at their
mercy than he was in this quiet corner of the market, where a velvet
coat with silver buttons was as rare a sight as a piece of the true
cross. Two or three houseless wretches looked on from their frowsy
lairs under the stalls, but no one dreamed of interfering with the men
in possession. As for the boy, he gazed at his captors stolidly; he
was white, mute, apathetic.

"Plague, if I don't think the lad is a softy!" said one, staring at
him.

"Not he!" replied the man who had hold of him. And roughly seizing the
boy by the head with his huge hand, he forced up an eyelid with his
finger as if to examine the eye. The boy uttered a cry of pain.
"There!" said the ruffian, grinning with triumph. "He is all right.
The question is, what shall we do with him?"

"There are his clothes," one muttered, eyeing the boy greedily.

"To be sure, there are always his clothes," was the answer. "It does
not take an Armand Jean du Plessis de Richelieu to see that, gaby!
And, of course, they would melt to the tune of something apiece! But
maybe we can do better than that with him. He has run away. You don't
find truffles on the dung-hill every day."

"Well," said his duller fellows, their eyes beginning to sparkle with
greed, "what then, Bec de Li√®vre?"

"If we take him home again, honest market porters, why should we not
be rewarded? Eh, my bully-boys?"

"That is a bright idea!" said one. So said another. The rest nodded.
"Ask him where he lives, when he is at home."

They did. But Jehan remained mute. "Twist his arm!" said the last
speaker. "He will soon tell you. Or stick your finger in his eye
again! Blest if I don't think the kid _is_ dumb!" the man continued,
gazing with astonishment at the boy's dull face and lack-lustre eyes.

"I think I shall find a tongue for him," the former operator replied
with a leer. "Here, sonny, answer before you are hurt, will you? Where
do you live?"

But Jehan remained silent. The ruffian raised his hand. In another
moment it would have fallen, but in the nick of time came an
interruption. "Nom de ma m√®re!" someone close at hand cried, in a
voice of astonishment. "It is my Jehan!"

Two of the party in possession turned savagely on the intruder--a
middle-sized man with foxy eyes, and a half-starved ape on his
shoulder. "Who asked you to speak?" snarled one. "Begone about your
business, my fine fellow, or I shall be making a hole in you!" cried
another.

"But he is my boy!" the new-comer answered, fairly trembling with joy
and astonishment. "He is my boy!"

"Your boy?" cried Bec de Li√®vre, in a tone of contempt. "You look like
it, don't you? You look as if you dined on gold plate every day and
had a Rohan to your cup-bearer, you do! Go along, man; don't try to
bamboozle us, or it will be the worse for you!" And with an angry
scowl he turned to his victim.

But the showman, though he was a coward, was not to be put down so
easily. "It is the boy who is bamboozling you!" he said. "You take him
for a swell! It is only his show dress he has on. He is a tumbler's
boy, I tell you. He circled the pole with me for two years. Last
November he ran away. If you do not believe me, ask the monkey. See,
the monkey knows him."

Bec de Li√®vre had to acknowledge that the monkey did know him. For the
poor beast was no sooner brought close to its old playmate than it
sprang upon him and covered him with caresses, gibbering and crying
out the while after so human a fashion that it might well have moved
hearts less hard. The boy did not return its endearments, however; but
a look of intelligence came into his eyes, and on a sudden he heaved a
sigh as if his heart was breaking.

The men who had taken possession of him looked at one another. "It was
the boy's cursed clothes fooled us," Bec de Li√®vre growled savagely.
"We will have them, at any rate. Strip him and have done with it. And
do you keep off, Master Tumbler, or we will tumble you."

But when the showman, who was trembling with delight and anticipation,
made them understand that he would give a crown for the boy as he was
in his clothes--"and that is more than the fence will give you," he
added--they began to see reason. True, they stood out for a while for
a higher price; but the bargain was eventually struck at a crown and a
livre, and the boy handed over.

Master Crafty Eyes' hand shook as he laid it on the child's collar and
turned him round so that he might see his face the better. Bec de
Li√®vre discerned the man's excitement, and looked at him curiously.
"You must be very fond of the lad," he said.

The showman's eyes glittered ferociously. "So fond of him," he said,
in a mocking tone, "that when I get him home I shall--oh, I shall not
hurt his fine clothes, or his face, or his little brown hands, for
those all show, and they are worth money to me. But I shall--I shall
put a poker in the fire, and then Master Jehan will take off his new
clothes so that they may not be singed, and--I shall teach him several
new tricks with the poker."

"You are a queer one," the other answered. "I'll be shot if you don't
look like a man with a good dinner before him."

"That is the man I am," the showman answered, a hideous smile
distorting his face. "I have gone without dinner or supper many a day
because my little friend here chose to run away one fine night, when
he was on the point of making my fortune. But I am going to dine now.
I am going to feed--on him!"

"Well, every man to his liking," the hare-lipped beggar answered
indifferently. "You have paid for your dinner, and may cook it as you
please, for me."

"I am going to," the showman answered, with an ugly look. He plucked
the boy almost off his feet as he spoke, and while the men cried after
him "_Bon app√©tit!_" and jeered, dragged him away across the open part
of the market; finally disappearing with him in one of the noisome
alleys which then led out of the Halles on the east side.

His way lay through a rabbit-warren of beetling passages and narrow
lanes, where the boy, once loose, could have dodged him a hundred ways
and escaped; and he held him with the utmost precaution, expecting him
every moment to make a desperate attempt at it. But Jehan was not the
old Jehan who had turned and twisted, walked and frolicked on the
rope, and in the utmost depths of ill-treatment had still kept teeth
to bite and spirit to use them. He was benumbed body and soul. He had
had no food for nearly twenty hours. He had passed the night exposed
to the cold. He had gone through intense excitement, horror, despair.
So he stumbled along, with Vidoche's dying cries in his ears, and,
famished, frozen, bemused, met the showman's threats with a face of
fixed, impassive apathy. He was within a very little of madness.

For a time Crafty Eyes did not heed this strange impassiveness. The
showman's fancy was busy with the punishment he would inflict when he
got the boy home to his miserable room. He gloated in anticipation
over the tortures he would contrive, and the care he would take that
they should not maim or disfigure the boy. When he had him tied down,
and the door locked, and the poker heated--ah! how he would enjoy
himself! The ruffian licked his lips. His eyes sparkled with pleasure.
He jerked the boy along in his hideous impatience.

But after a time the child's bearing began to annoy him. He stopped
and, holding him with one hand, beat him brutally on the head with the
other, until the boy fell and hung in his grasp. Then he dragged him
up roughly and hauled him on with volleys of oaths; still scowling at
him from time to time, as if, somehow, he found this little foretaste
of vengeance less satisfying than he had expected.

There were people coming and going in the dark filthy lane where this
happened--a place where smoke-grimed gables almost met overhead, and
the gutter was choked with refuse--but no one interfered. What was a
little beating more or less? Or, for the matter of that, what was a
boy more or less? The hulking loafers and frowsy slatterns, who
huddled for warmth in corners, nodded their heads and looked on
approvingly. They had their own brats to beat and business to mind.
There was no one to take the boy's part. And another hundred yards
would lodge him in the showman's garret.

At that last moment the boy awoke from his trance and understood; and
in a convulsion of fear hung back and struggled, screaming and
throwing himself down. The man dragged him up savagely, and was in the
act of taking him up bodily to carry him, when a person, who had
already passed the pair once, came back and looked at the boy again.
The next moment a hand fell on the showman's arm, and a voice said,
"Stop! What boy is that?"

The showman looked up, saw that the intervener was a priest, and
sneered. "What is that to you, father?" he said, trying by a side
movement to pass by. "Not one of your flock, at any rate."

"No, but you are!" the priest retorted in a strangely sonorous voice.
He was a stalwart man, with a mobile face and sad eyes that seemed out
of keeping with the rest of him. "You are! And if you do not this
minute set him down and answer my question, you ruffian, when your
time comes you shall go to the tree alone!"

"Diable!" the showman muttered, startled yet scowling. "Who are you,
then?"

"I am Father Bernard. Now tell me about that boy, and truly. What have
you been doing to him? Ay, you may well tremble, rascal!"

For the showman was trembling. In the Paris of that day the name of
Father Bernard was almost as well known as the name of Cardinal
Richelieu. There was not a night-prowler or cutpurse, bully or
swindler, who did not know it, and dream in his low fits, when the
drink was out and the money spent, of the day when he would travel by
Father Bernard's side to Montfaucon, and find no other voice and no
other eye to pity him in his trouble. Impelled by feelings of
humanity, rare at that time, this man made it his life-work to attend
on all who were cast for execution; to wait on them in prison, and be
with them at the last, and by his presence and words of comfort to
alleviate their sufferings here, and bring them to a better mind. He
had become so well known in this course of work that the king himself
did him honour, and the Cardinal granted him special rights. The mob
also. The priest passed unharmed through the lowest wynds of Paris,
and penetrated habitually to places where the Lieutenant of the
Ch√¢telet, with a dozen pikes at his back, would not have been safe for
a moment.

This was the man whose stern voice brought the showman to a
standstill. Master Crafty Eyes faltered. Then he remembered that the
boy was his boy, that his title to him was good. He said so sulkily.

"Your boy?" the priest replied, frowning. "Who are you, then?"

"An acrobat, father."

"So I thought. But do acrobats' boys wear black velvet clothes with
silver buttons?"

"He was stolen from me," the showman answered eagerly. He had a good
conscience as to the clothes. "I have only just recovered him,
father."

"Who stole him? Where has he been?" The priest spoke quickly, and with
no little excitement. He looked narrowly at the boy the while, holding
him at arm's length. "Where did he spend last night, for instance?"

The showman spread out his palms and shrugged his shoulders. "How
should I know?" he said. "I was not with him."

"He has black hair and blue eyes!"

"Yes. But what of that?" Crafty Eyes answered. "I can swear to him. He
is my boy."

"And mine!" Father Bernard retorted with energy. "The boy I want!" The
priest's eyes sparkled, his form seemed to dilate with triumph. "Deo
laus! Deo laus!" he murmured sonorously, so that a score of loiterers
who had gathered round, and were staring and shivering by turns, fell
back affrighted and crossed themselves. "He is the boy! God has put
him in my way this day as clearly as if an angel had led me by the
hand. And he goes with me; he goes with me. Chut, man!"--this to the
showman, who stood frowning in his path--"don't dare to look black at
me. The boy goes with me, I say. I want him for a purpose. If you
choose you can come too."

"Whither?"

"To the Ch√¢telet," Father Bernard answered, with a grim chuckle. "You
don't seem to relish the idea. But do as you please."

"You will take the boy?"

"This moment," the priest answered.

"_Mon Dieu!_ but you shall not!" the showman exclaimed. Wrath for the
moment drove out fear. He seized the child by the arm. "He is my boy!
You shall not, I say!" he cried, almost foaming with rage. "He is
mine!"


[Illustration: "'WHO STOLE HIM? WHERE HAS HE BEEN?'" (_p_. 169).]


"Idiot! Beast! Gallows-bird!" the priest thundered in reply. "For
one-half of a denier I would throw you into the next street! Let go,
or I will blast you with--Oh, it is well for you you are reasonable.
Now begone! Begone! or, at a word from me, there are a score here
will----"

He did not finish his sentence, for the showman fell back
panic-stricken, and stood off among the crowd, malevolence and craven
fear struggling for the mastery in his countenance. The priest took
the boy up gently in his arms and looked at him. His face grew
strangely mild as he did so. The black brows grew smooth, the lips
relaxed. "Get a little water," he said to the nearest man, a hulking,
olive-skinned Southerner. "The child has swooned."

"Your pardon, father," the man answered. "He is dead."

But Father Bernard shook his head. "No, my son," he said kindly. "He
who led me here to-day will keep life in him a little longer. God's
ways never end in a _cul-de-sac_. Get the water. He has swooned only."




                             CHAPTER IX.

                          BEFORE THE COURT.


Since the poisoning of the Prince of Cond√© by his servant, Brillaut,
at the instigation--as was alleged and commonly believed--of Madame la
Princesse, no tragedy of the kind had caused a greater sensation in
Paris, or been the subject of more talk, than the murder of M. de
Vidoche. The remarkable circumstances which attended it--and which
lost nothing in the narration--its immediate discovery, the apparent
lack of motive, and the wealth, rank, and youth of the guilty wife,
all helped, with the fulness of Paris at this time and the absence of
any stirring political news, to make it the one topic of interest.
Nothing else was talked of in chamber or tennis court, in the Grand
Gallery at the Louvre, or in the cardinal's ante-room at the Palais
Richelieu. Culprit and victim were alike well known. M. de Vidoche, if
no favourite, had been at least a conspicuous figure in society. He
had been cast for one of the parts in the royal troupe at the
Christmas carnival. His flirtation with Mademoiselle de Farincourt had
been sufficiently marked to cause both amusement and interest. And if
madame was a less familiar figure at Court, if she had a reputation
somewhat prudish, and an air of rusticity that did not belie it, and
was even less of a favourite than her husband, her position as a great
heiress and the last of an old family gave her a _cachet_ which did
not fail to make her interesting now.

Gladly would the great ladies in their coaches have gone down to the
Ch√¢telet to stare at her after the cruel fashion of that day; and,
after buzzing round her in her misery, have gone away with a hundred
tales of how she looked, and what she wore, and what she said in
prison. But madame was saved this--this torture worse than the
question--by the physician's order that no one should be admitted to
her. He laid this down so strenuously--telling the lieutenant that if
she had not complete repose for twenty-four hours he would be
answerable neither for her life nor her reason--that that officer,
who, like the Chevalier du Guet, was an old soldier, replied "No" to
the most pressing insistences; and save and except Father Bernard, who
had the _entr√©e_ at all hours by the king's command, would let no one
go in to her. "It will be bad enough by-and-bye," he said, with an
oath. "If she did it, she will be punished. But she shall have a
little peace to-day."

But the great world, baffled on this point, grew only the more
curious; circulated stories only the more outrageous; and nodded and
winked and whispered only the more assiduously. Would she be put to
the question? And by the rack, or the boot, or the water torture? And
who was the man? Of course there was a man. Now if it had been M. de
Vidoche who had poisoned her, that would have been plain,
intelligible, perspicuous; since everyone knew--and so on, and so on,
with Mademoiselle de Farincourt's name at intervals.

It was believed that madame would be first examined in private; but
late at night, on the day before Christmas Eve, a sealed order came to
the Lieutenant of the Ch√¢telet, commanding him to present madame, with
her servants and all concerned in the case, at the Palais de Justice
on the following morning. Late as it was, the news was known in every
part of Paris that night. Marshal Bassompierre, lying in the Bastille,
heard it, and regretted he could not see the sight. It was rumoured
that the king would attend in person; even that the trial had been
hastened for his pleasure. It was certain that half the Court would be
there, and the other half, if it could find room. The great ladies,
who had failed to storm the Ch√¢telet, hoped to succeed better at the
Palais, and the First President of the Court, and even the
Commissioners appointed to sit with him, found their doors beset at
dawn with delicate "_poulets_," or urgent, importunate applications.

Madame de Vidoche, the man and maid, were brought from the Ch√¢telet to
the Conciergerie an hour before daylight--madame in her coach, with
her woman, the man on foot. That cold morning ride was such as few,
thank God, are called on to endure. To the horrors of anticipation the
lost wife, scarcely more than a girl, had to add the misery of
retrospection; to the knowledge of what she had done, a woman's
shrinking from the doom that threatened her, from shame and pain and
death. But that which she felt perhaps as keenly as anything, as she
crouched in a corner of her curtained vehicle and heard the yells
which everywhere saluted its appearance, was the sudden sense of
loneliness and isolation. True, the Lieutenant sat opposite to her,
but his face was hard. She was no longer a woman to him, but a
prisoner, a murderess, a poisoner. And the streets were thronged, in
spite of the cold and the early hour. On the Pont au Change the people
ran beside the coach and strove to get a sight of her, and jeered and
sang and shouted. And at the entrance to the Palais, in the room in
the Conciergerie where she had to wait, on the staircase to the court
above, everywhere it was the same; all were set so thick with
faces--staring, curious faces--that the guards could scarcely make a
way for her. But she was cut off from all. She was no longer of
them--of things living. Not one said a kind word to her; not one
looked sympathy or pity. On a sudden, in a moment, with hundreds
gazing at her, she, a delicate woman, found herself a thing apart,
unclean, to be shunned. A thing, no longer a person. A prisoner, no
longer a woman.

They placed a seat for her, and she sank into it, feeling at first
nothing but the shame of being so stared at. But presently she had to
rise and be sworn, and then, as she became conscious of other things,
as the details of the crowded chamber forced themselves on her
attention, and she saw which were the judges, and heard herself called
upon to answer the questions that should be put to her, the instinct
of self-preservation, the desire to clear herself, to escape and live,
took hold of her. A late instinct, for hitherto all her thoughts had
been of the man she had killed--her husband; but the fiercer for that.
A burning flush suddenly flamed in her cheeks. Her eyes grew bright,
her heart began to beat quickly. She turned giddy.

She knew only of one way in which she could escape; only of one man
that could help her; and even while the first judge was in the act of
calling upon her, she turned from him and looked round. She looked to
the right, to the left, then behind her, for N√¥tredame. He, if he told
the truth, could clear her! He could say that she had come to him for
a charm, and not for poison! And he only! But where was he? There was
her woman, trembling and weeping, waiting to be called. There was the
valet, pale and frightened. There were twice a hundred indifferent
people. But N√¥tredame? He was not visible. He was not there. When she
had satisfied herself of this, she sank back with a moan of despair.
She gave up hope again. A hundred curious eyes saw the colour fade
from her cheeks; her eyes grew dull, the whole woman collapsed.

The examination began. She gave her name in a hollow whisper.

It was the practice of that day, and still is, in French courts, to
take advantage of any self-betrayal or emotion on the part of the
accused person. It is the duty of the judges to observe the prisoner
constantly and narrowly; and the First President, on an occasion such
as this, was not the man to overlook anything which was visible to the
ordinary spectator. Instead, therefore, of pursuing the regular
interrogatory he had in his mind, he leaned forward and asked madame
what was the matter.

"I wish for the man Solomon N√¥tredame," Madame de Vidoche answered,
rising and speaking in a choking voice.

"That is the man from whom you bought the poison, I think?" the judge
answered, affecting to look at his notes.

"Yes, but as a love-philtre--not a poison," madame said in a whisper.
"I wish him to be here."

"You wish to be confronted with him?"

"Yes."

"With the man Solomon N√¥tredame?"

"Yes."

"Then you shall be, presently," the judge replied, leaning back, and
casting a singular glance at his colleagues. "Be satisfied. And now,
madame," he continued gravely, as his eyes returned to her, "it is my
duty to help you to tell, and your duty to confess frankly, all that
you know concerning this matter. Be good enough, therefore, to collect
yourself, and answer my questions fully and truly, as you hope for
mercy here and hereafter. So you will save yourself pain, and such
also as shall examine you; and may best deserve, in the worst case,
the king's indulgence."

As he uttered this exhortation madame clung to the bar behind which
she stood, and seemed for the moment about to faint, so that the
President waited awhile before he proceeded. She looked, indeed,
ghostly. Her white face gleamed through the fog--which, rising from
the river, was fast filling the chamber--like a face seen for an
instant on a wreck through mist and spray and tempest. Ladies who had
known her as an equal, and who now gazed heartlessly down at her from
galleries, felt a pleasant thrill of excitement, and whispered that
they had not braved the early cold for nothing. There was not a man in
the court who did not expect to see her fall.

But there is in women a power of endurance far exceeding that of men.
By an immense effort madame regained control over herself. She
answered the President's opening questions faintly but clearly; and,
being led at once to tell of her visit to N√¥tredame, had sufficient
sense of her position to dwell plainly on the two facts important to
her--that the object of her visit was a love-potion, and not a poison,
and that the instructions first given to her were to take it herself.
The latter assertion produced a startling impression in the court. It
was completely unexpected; and though ninety-nine out of a hundred
fancied it the bold invention of a desperate woman, all allowed that
it added zest to the case.

Naturally the President pressed her hard on these points. He strove,
both by cajolery and by stating objections, to make her withdraw from
them. But she would not. Nor could he entrap her into narrating
anything at variance with them. At length he desisted. "Very well, we
will leave that," he said; and so subtly had her story gained sympathy
for her that the sigh of relief uttered in the court was perfectly
audible. "We will pass on, if you please. The boy who overtook you in
the street, and, as you say, altered all? Who was he, madame?"

"I do not know."

"You had seen him before?"

"No."

"Did he not open the door at this N√¥tredame's when you entered the
house?"

"No."

"Nor when you left?"

"No."

"How did you know, then, madame, that he came from this abominable
person whom you had been visiting?"

"He said he did."

"And do you tell us," the judge retorted, "that on the mere word of
this boy, whom you did not know and had never seen, without the
assurance of any token or countersign, you disregarded the man
N√¥tredame's directions on the most vital point, and, instead of taking
this drug yourself, gave it to your husband?"

"I do."

"Without suspecting that it was other than that for which you had
asked?"

"Yes."

"Madame," the judge said slowly, "it is incredible." He looked for a
moment at his colleagues, as if to collect their opinions. They
nodded. He turned to her again. "Do you not see that?" he said almost
kindly.

"I do not," madame answered firmly. "It is true."

"Describe the boy, if you please."

"He had--I think he had dark clothes," she answered, faltering for the
first time. "He looked about twelve years old."

"Yes," the President said; "go on."

"He had--I could not see any more," madame muttered faintly. "It was
dark."

"And do you expect us to believe this?" the President replied with
warmth, real or assumed. "Do you expect us to believe such a story? Or
that it was at the instance of this boy only--this boy of whom you
knew nothing, whom you cannot describe, whom you had never seen
before--that it was at his instance only that you gave this drug to
your husband, instead of taking it yourself?"

She reeled slightly, clinging to the bar. The court swam before her.
She saw, as he meant her to see, the full hopelessness of her
position, the full strength of the case which fate had made against
her, her impotence, her helplessness. Yet she forced herself to make
an effort. "It is the truth," she said, in a broken voice. "I loved
him."

"Ah!" the President replied cynically. He repressed by a gesture a
slight disturbance at the rear of the court. "That, of course. It is
part of the story. Or why a love-philtre? But do you not see, madame,"
he continued, bending his brows and speaking in the tone he used to
common criminals, "that all the wives in Paris might poison their
husbands, and when they were found out say 'It was a love-potion,' if
you are to escape? No, no; we must have some better tale than that."

She looked at him in terror and shame. "I have no other," she cried
wildly. "That is the truth. If you do not believe me, there is
N√¥tredame. Ask him."

"You applied to be confronted with him some time back," the President
answered, looking aside at his colleagues, who nodded. "Is that still
your desire?"

She murmured "Yes," with dry lips.

"Then let him be called," the judge answered solemnly. "Let Solomon
N√¥tredame be called and confronted with the accused."

The order was received with a general stir, a movement of curiosity
and expectation. Those in the galleries leaned forward to see the
better; those at the back stood up. Madame, with her lips parted and
her breath coming quickly--madame, the poor centre of all--gazed with
her soul in her eyes towards the door at which she saw others gazing.
All for her depended on this man--the man she was about to see. Would
he lie and accuse her? Or would he tell the truth and corroborate her
story--say, in a word, that she had come for a love-charm, and not for
poison? Surely this last? Surely it would be to his interest?

But while she gazed with her soul in her eyes, the door which had been
partly opened fell shut again, and disappointed her. At the same
moment there was a general movement and rustling round her, an
uprising in every part of the chamber. In bewilderment, almost in
impatience, she turned towards the judges and found that they had
risen too. Then through a door behind them she saw six gentlemen file
in, with a flash and sparkle of colour that lit up the sombre bench.
The first was the king.

Louis was about thirty-five years old at this time--a dark, sallow
man, wearing black, with a wide-leafed hat, in which a costly diamond
secured a plume of white feathers. He carried a walking cane, and
saluted the judges as he entered, Three gentlemen--two about the
king's age, the third a burly, soldierly man of sixty--followed him,
and took their places behind the canopied chair placed for him. The
fifth to enter--but he passed behind the judges and took a chair which
stood on their left--wore a red robe trimmed with fur, and a small red
cap. He was a man of middle height and pale complexion, keen Italian
features and bright piercing eyes, and so far was not remarkable. But
he had also a coal-black moustache and chin tuft, and milk-white hair;
and this contrast won him recognition everywhere. He was Armand Jean
du Plessis, Duke and Cardinal Richelieu, soldier, priest, and
playwriter, and for sixteen years the ruler of France.

Madame gazed at them with a beating heart, with wild hopes that would
rise, despite herself. But, oh God! how coldly their eyes met hers!
With what a stony stare! With what curiosity, indifference, contempt!
Alas, they had come for that. They had come to stare. This was their
Christmas show--part of their Christmas revels. And she--she was a
woman on her trial, a poisoner, a murderess, a vile thing to be
questioned, tortured, dragged to a shameful death!

For a moment or two the king talked with the judges. Then he sat back
in his chair. The President made a sign, and an usher in a sonorous
voice cried, "Solomon N√¥tredame! Let Solomon N√¥tredame stand forth!"




                              CHAPTER X.

                            TWO WITNESSES.


Madame de Vidoche heard the name and braced herself again, turning
towards the door as others turned, and waiting with dry lips and
feverish eyes for the man who was to save her--to save her in spite of
king and court. Would he never come? The door stood open, remained
open. She could see through it the passage with its bare walls and
dusky ceiling, and hear in the hushed silence a noise of shuffling
feet. Gradually the noise grew louder; though it still seemed a thing
by itself, and so distant that in the court where they waited, with
every eye expectant, the slightest sound, the lowest whisper was
audible. When the usher cried again, "Solomon N√¥tredame, stand
forward!" more than one glanced at him angrily. He balked their
expectation.

Ha! at last! But they were carrying him! Madame shivered slightly as
she watched the four men come slowly along the passage, bearing a
chair between them. At the door they stumbled and paused, giving her
time to think. They had been racking him, then, and he could not walk;
she might have guessed it. Her cheek, white before, became a shade
ghastlier, and she clutched the bar with a firmer grip.

They brought him slowly down the three steps and through the narrow
passage towards her. The men who carried him blocked her view, but she
saw presently that there was something odd about his head. When they
set him down, three paces from her, she saw what it was. His face was
covered. There was a loose cloth over his head, and he leaned forward
in a strange way.

What did it mean? She began to tremble, gazing at him wildly,
expecting she knew not what. And he did not move.


[Illustration: "THEY WERE CARRYING HIM" (_p_. 192).]


Suddenly the President's solemn voice broke the silence. "Madame," he
said--but it seemed to her that he was speaking a long way off--"here
is your witness. You asked to be confronted with him, and the court,
hoping that this may be the more merciful way of inducing you to
confess your crime, assent to the request. But I warn you that he is a
witness not for you, but against you. He has confessed."

For a moment she looked dumbly at the speaker; then her eyes went back
to the veiled figure in the chair--it had a horrible attraction for
her.

"Unhappy woman," the President continued, in solemn accents, "he has
confessed. Will you now, before you look upon him, do likewise?"

She shook her head. She would have denied, protested, cried that she
was not guilty; but her throat was parched--she had lost her voice,
hope, all. There was a drumming noise in the court; or perhaps it was
in her head. It was growing dark, too.

"He has confessed," she heard the President go on--but he was speaking
a long, long way off now, and his voice came to her ears dully--"by
executing on himself that punishment which otherwise the law would
have imposed. Are you still obstinate? Let the face be uncovered then.
Now, wretched woman, look on your accomplice."

Perhaps he spoke in mercy, and to prepare her; for she looked, and
did not at once swoon, though the sight of that dead yellow face, with
its stony eyes and open mouth, drew shrieks from more than one. The
self-poisoner had done his work well. The sombre features wore even in
death a cynical grin, the lips a smile of triumph. But this was on the
surface. In the glassy eyes, dull and lustreless, lurked--as all saw
who gazed closely--a horror; a look of sudden awakening, as if in the
moment of dissolution the wicked man had come face to face with
judgment; and, triumphant over his earthly foes, had met on the
threshold of the dark world a shape that froze the very marrow in his
bones.

Grimmest irony that he who had so long sported with the things of
death, and traded on men's fear of it, should himself be brought here
dead, to be exposed and gazed at! Of small use now his tricks and
chemicals, his dark knowledge and the mystery in which he had wrapped
himself. Orcus had him, grim head, black heart and all.

A moment, I have said, madame stared. Then gradually the truth, the
hideous truth, came home to her. He was dead! He had killed himself!
The horror of it overcame her at last. With a shuddering cry she fell
swooning to the floor.

When she came to herself again--after how long an interval she
could not tell--and the piled faces and sharp outlines of the court
began to shape themselves out of the mist, her first thought, as
remembrance returned, was of the ghastly figure in the chair. With an
effort--someone was sponging her forehead, and would have restrained
her--she turned her head and looked. To her relief it was gone. She
sighed, and closing her eyes lay for a time inert, hearing the hum of
voices, but paying no attention. But gradually the misery of her
position took hold of her again, and with a faint moan she looked up.

In a moment she fell to trembling and crying softly, for her eyes met
those of the woman who stooped over her and read there something new,
strange, wonderful--kindness. The woman patted her hand softly, and
murmured to her to be still and to listen. She was listening herself
between times, and presently madame followed her example.

Dull as her senses still were, she noticed that the king sat forward
with an odd keen look on his face, that the judges seemed startled,
that even the Cardinal's pale features were slightly flushed. And not
one of all had eyes for her. They were looking at a boy who stood at
the end of the table, beside a priest. The cold light from a window
fell full on his face, and he was speaking. "I listened," she heard
him say. "Yes."

"And how long a time elapsed before Madame de Vidoche came?" the
President asked, continuing, apparently, an examination of which she
had missed the first part.

"Half an hour, I think," the boy answered, in a clear, bold tone.

"You are sure it was poison he required?"

"I am sure."

"And madame?"

"A love-philtre."

"You heard both interviews?"

"Both."

"You are sure of the arrangement made between Vidoche and this man, of
which you have told us? That the poison should be given to madame in
the form of a love-philtre? That she might take it herself?"

"I am sure."

"And it was you who ran after Madame de Vidoche and told her that the
draught was to be given to her husband instead?"

"Yes."

"Do you acknowledge, then," the President continued slowly, "that it
was you who, in fact, killed M. de Vidoche?"

For the first time the boy faltered and stumbled, and looked this way
and that as if for a chance of escape. But there was none, and Father
Bernard, by laying his hand on his arm, seemed to give him courage. "I
do," he answered, in a low tone.

"Why?" the President demanded, with a quick look at his colleagues. He
spoke amid an irrepressible murmur of interest. The tale had been told
once, but it was a tale that bore telling.

"Because--I heard him plan his wife's death--and I thought it right,"
the boy stammered, terror growing in his eyes. "I wanted to save her.
I did not know. I did not think."

The President looked towards the king, but suddenly from an unexpected
quarter came an interruption. Madame rose trembling to her feet and
stood grasping the bar before her. Her face passed from white to red,
and red to white. Her eyes glittered through her tears. The woman
beside her would have held her back, but she would not be restrained.
"What is this?" she panted. "Does he say that my husband was--there?"

"Yes, madame, he does," the President answered indulgently.

"And that he came for poison--for me?"

"He says so, madame."

She looked at him for a moment wildly, then sank back on her stool and
began to sob. She had gone through so many emotions; love and death,
shame and fear, had so sported with her during the last few days that
she could taste nothing to the full now, neither sweet nor bitter. As
the dawning of life and hope had left her rather dazed than thankful,
so this stab, that a little earlier would have pierced her very
heartstrings, did but prick her. Afterwards the thankfulness and the
pain--and the healing--might come. But here in the presence of all
these people, where so much had happened to her, she could only sob
weakly.

The President turned again to the king. Louis nodded, and with a
painful effort--for he stammered terribly--spoke. "Who is th-this
lad?" he said. "Ask him."

The judge bowed and returned to the witness. "You call yourself Jean
de Bault?" he said somewhat roughly. The name, and especially the
particle, displeased him.

The boy assented.

"Who are you, then?"

Jehan opened his mouth to answer, but Father Bernard interposed. "Tell
His Majesty," he said, "what you told me."

After a moment's hesitation the boy complied, speaking fast, with his
face on his breast and a flushed cheek. Nevertheless, in the silence
every word reached the ear. "I am Jehan de Bault," he pattered in his
treble voice, "seigneur of I know not where, and lord of seventeen
lordships in the county of Perigord----" and so on, and so on, through
the quaint formula to which we have listened more than once.

Ninety-nine out of a hundred who heard him, heard him with incredulous
surprise, and took the tale for a mountebank's patter; though patter,
they acknowledged it was of a novel kind, aptly made and well spoken.
Two or three of the bolder laughed. There had been little to laugh at
before. The king moved restlessly in his chair, saying, "Pish! Wh-hat
is this rubbish? What is he s-saying?"

The President frowned, and taking his cue from the king, was about to
rebuke the boy sharply, when one who had not before spoken, but whose
voice in an instant produced silence among high and low, intervened.
"The tale rings true!" the Cardinal said, in low, suave accents. "But
there is no family of Bault in Perigord, is there?"

"With His Majesty's permission, no!" replied a bluff, hearty voice;
and therewith the elderly soldier who had come in with the king
advanced a pace to the side of his master's chair. "I am of Perigord,
and know, your Eminence," he continued. "More. Two months ago I saw
this lad--I recognise him now--at the fair of F√©camp. He was
differently dressed then, but he had the same tale, except that he did
not mention Perigord."

"S-someone has taught it him," said the king.

"Your Majesty is doubtless right," the President answered
obsequiously. Then to the boy he continued, "Speak, boy; who taught it
you?"

But Jehan only shook his head and looked puzzled. At last, being
pressed, he said, "At Bault, in Perigord."

"There is no such place!" M. de Bresly cried roundly.

Father Bernard looked distressed. He began to repent that he had led
the child to tell the tale; he began to fear that it might hurt
instead of helping. Perhaps after all he had been too credulous. But
again the Cardinal came to the rescue.

"Is there any family in Perigord can boast of three marshals, M. de
Bresly?" he asked, in his thin incisive tones.

"None that I know of. Several that can boast of two."

"The blood of Roland?"

M. de Bresly shrugged his shoulders. "It is common to all of us," he
said, smiling.

The great Cardinal smiled, too--a flickering, quickly-passing smile.
Then he leaned forward and fixed the boy with his fierce black eyes.
"What was your father's name?" he said.

Jehan shook his head, impotently, miserably.

"Where did you live?"

The same result. The king threw himself back and muttered, "It is no
good." The President moved in his seat. Some in the galleries began to
whisper.

But the Cardinal raised his hand imperiously. "Can you read?" he said.

"No," Jehan murmured.

"Then your arms?" The Cardinal spoke rapidly now, and his face was
growing hard. "They were over the gate, over the door, over the
fireplace. Think--look back--reflect. What were they?"

For a moment. Jehan stared at him in bewilderment, flinching under the
gaze of those piercing eyes. Then on a sudden the boy's face grew
crimson. He raised his hand eagerly. "_Or, on a mount vert!_" he cried
impetuously--and stopped. But presently, in a different voice, he
added slowly, "It was a tree--on a hill."

With a swift look of triumph the Cardinal turned to M. de Bresly.
"Now," he said, "that belongs to----"

The soldier nodded almost sulkily. "It is Madame de Vidoche's," he
said.

"And her name was----"

"Martinbault. Mademoiselle de Martinbault!"

A murmur of astonishment rose from every part of the court. For a
moment the King, the Cardinal, the President, M. de Bresly, all were
inaudible. The air seemed full of exclamations, questions, answers; it
rang with the words, "Bault--Martinbault!" Everywhere people rose to
see the boy, or craned forward and slipped with a clattering noise.
Etiquette, reverence, even the presence of the king, went for nothing
in the rush of excitement. It was long before the ushers could obtain
silence, or any get a hearing.

Then M. de Bresly, who looked as much excited as any, and as red in
the face, was found to be speaking. "Pardieu, sire, it may be so!" he
was heard to say. "It is true enough, as I now remember. A child was
lost in that family about eight years back. But it was at the time of
the Rochelle expedition; the province was full of trouble, and M. and
Madame de Martinbault were just dead; and little was made of it. All
the same, this may be the boy. Nay, it is a thousand to one he is!"

"What is he, then, to M--Madame de V--Vidoche?" the king asked, with
an effort. He was vastly excited--for him.

"A brother, sire," M. de Bresly answered.

That word pierced at last through the dulness which wrapped madame's
faculties, and had made her impervious to all that had gone before.
She rose slowly, listened, looked at the boy---looked with growing
wonder, like one awakening from a dream. Possibly in that moment the
later years fell from her, and she saw herself again a child--a tall,
lanky girl playing in the garden of the old ch√¢teau with a little
toddling boy who ran and lisped, beat her sturdily with fat, bare arms
or cuddled to her for kisses. For with a sudden gesture she stretched
out her hands, and cried in a clear voice, "Jean! Jean! It is little
Jean!"

                          *   *   *   *   *

It became the fashion--a fashion which lasted half a dozen years at
least--to call that Christmas the Martinbault Christmas; so loudly did
those who were present at that famous examination, and the discovery
which attended it, profess that it exceeded all the other amusements
of the year, not excepting even the great ball at the Palais Cardinal,
from which every lady carried off an _√©trenne_ worth a year's
pin-money. The story became the rage. Those who had been present drove
their friends, who had not been so fortunate, to the verge of madness.
From the court the tale spread to the markets. Men made a broadsheet
of it, and sold it in the streets--in the Rue Touchet, and under the
gallows at Montfaucon, where the body of Solomon N√¥tredame withered in
the spring rains. Had Madame de Vidoche and the child stayed in Paris,
it must have offended their ears ten times a day.

