Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders,
closing his eyes, as though to say that that could not be a
source of joy to him.  Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well
aware that it was one of his chief sources of satisfaction,
though he never admitted it.

"How is our angel?" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning
Seryozha.

"I can't say I was quite pleased with him," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes.  "And
Sitnikov is not satisfied with him."  (Sitnikov was the tutor to
whom Seryozha's secular education had been intrusted.)  "As I
have mentioned to you, there's a sort of coldness in him towards
the most important questions which ought to touch the heart of
every man and every child...."  Alexey Alexandrovitch began
expounding his views on the sole question that interested him
besides the service--the education of his son.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna's help had been
brought back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to
undertake the education of the son left on his hands.  Having
never before taken any interest in educational questions, Alexey
Alexandrovitch devoted some time to the theoretical study of the
subject.  After reading several books on anthropology, education,
and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of education,
and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg to superintend it, he
set to work, and the subject continually absorbed him.

"Yes, but the heart.  I see in him his father's heart, and with
such a heart a child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna
with enthusiasm.

"Yes, perhaps....  As for me, I do my duty.  It's all I can
do."

"You're coming to me," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a
pause; "we have to speak of a subject painful for you.  I would
give anything to have spared you certain memories, but others
are not of the same mind.  I have received a letter from _her_.
_She_ is here in Petersburg."

Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but
immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which
expressed utter helplessness in the matter.

"I was expecting it," he said.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of
rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.



Chapter 25


When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna's snug little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung
with portraits, the lady herself had not yet made her appearance.

She was changing her dress.

A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china
tea service and a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch looked idly about at the endless familiar
portraits which adorned the room, and sitting down to the table,
he opened a New Testament lying upon it.  The rustle of the
countess's silk skirt drew his attention off.

"Well now, we can sit quietly," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and
the sofa, "and talk over our tea."

After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
breathing hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexey
Alexandrovitch's hands the letter she had received.

After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.

"I don't think I have the right to refuse her," he said,
timidly lifting his eyes.

"Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"

"On the contrary, I see that all is evil.  But whether it is
just..."

His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support,
and guidance in a matter he did not understand.

"No," Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; "there are limits
to everything.  I can understand immorality," she said, not
quite truthfully, since she never could understand that which
leads women to immorality; "but I don't understand cruelty: to
whom? to you!  How can she stay in the town where you are?  No,
the longer one lives the more one learns.  And I'm learning to
understand your loftiness and her baseness."

"Who is to throw a stone?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
unmistakably pleased with the part he had to play.  "I have
forgiven all, and so I cannot deprive her of what is exacted by
love in her--by her love for her son...."

"But is that love, my friend?  Is it sincere?  Admitting that you
have forgiven--that you forgive--have we the right to work on the
feelings of that angel?  He looks on her as dead.  He prays for
her, and beseeches God to have mercy on her sins.  And it is
better so.  But now what will he think?"

"I had not thought of that," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
evidently agreeing.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent.
she was praying.

"If you ask my advice," she said, having finished her prayer and
uncovered her face, "I do not advise you to do this.  Do you
suppose I don't see how you are suffering, how this has torn open
your wounds?  But supposing that, as always, you don't think of
yourself, what can it lead to?--to fresh suffering for you, to
torture for the child.  If there were a trace of humanity left in
her, she ought not to wish for it herself.  No, I have no
hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you will intrust it to
me, I will write to her."

And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna
sent the following letter in French:

"Dear Madame,

"To be reminded of you might have results for your son in leading
to questions on his part which could not be answered without
implanting in the child's soul a spirit of censure towards what
should be for him sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret
your husband's refusal in the spirit of Christian love.  I pray
to Almighty God to have mercy on you.
                                Countess Lidia"

This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia
Ivanovna had concealed from herself.  It wounded Anna to the
quick.

For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna's, could not all that day concentrate himself on his
usual pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and
believing which he had felt of late.

The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him,
and towards whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia
Ivanovna had so justly told him, ought not to have troubled him;
but he was not easy; he could not understand the book he was
reading; he could not drive away harassing recollections of his
relations with her, of the mistake which, as it now seemed, he
had made in regard to her.  The memory of how he had received her
confession of infidelity on their way home from the races
(especially that he had insisted only on the observance of
external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like
a remorse.  He was tortured too by the thought of the letter he
had written her; and most of all, his forgiveness, which nobody
wanted, and his care of the other man's child made his heart burn
with shame and remorse.

And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he
reviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in
which, after long wavering, he had made her an offer.

"But how have I been to blame?" he said to himself.  And this
question always excited another question in him--whether they
felt differently, did their loving and marrying differently,
these Vronskys and Oblonskys...these gentlemen of the
bedchamber, with their fine calves.  And there passed before his
mind a whole series of these mettlesome, vigorous, self-
confident men, who always and everywhere drew his inquisitive
attention in spite of himself.  He tried to dispel these
thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living for
this transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there
was peace and love in his heart.

But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as
it seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though
the eternal salvation in which he believed had no existence.  But
this temptation did not last long, and soon there was
reestablished once more in Alexey Alexandrovitch's soul the peace
and the elevation by virtue of which he could forget what he did
not want to remember.



Chapter 26


"Well, Kapitonitch?" said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-
humored from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his
overcoat to the tall old hall porter, who smiled down at the
little person from the height of his long figure.  "Well, has the
bandaged clerk been here today?  Did papa see him?"

"He saw him.  The minute the chief secretary came out, I
announced him," said the hall porter with a good-humored wink.
"Here, I'll take it off."

"Seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to
the inner rooms.  "Take it off yourself."  But Seryozha, though
he heard his tutor's feeble voice, did not pay attention to it.
He stood keeping hold of the hall porter's belt, and gazing into
his face.

"Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"

The hall porter nodded his head affirmatively.  The clerk with
his face tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some
favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the
hall porter.  Seryozha had come upon him in the hall, and had
heard him plaintively beg the hall porter to announce him, saying
that he and his children had death staring them in the face.

Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall,
took great interest in him.

"Well, was he very glad?" he asked.

"Glad?  I should think so!  Almost dancing as he walked away."

"And has anything been left?" asked Seryozha, after a pause.

"Come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head
he whispered, "Something from the countess."

Seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter was
speaking of was a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his
birthday.

"What do you say?  Where?"

"Korney took it to your papa.  A fine plaything it must be too!"

"How big?  Like this?"

"Rather small, but a fine thing."

"A book."

"No, a thing.  Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling
you," said the porter, hearing the tutor's steps approaching, and
carefully taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove
half pulled off, he signed with his head towards the tutor.

"Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered Seryozha with that
gay and loving smile which always won over the conscientious
Vassily Lukitch.

Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to
be able to help sharing with his friend the porter the family
good fortune of which he had heard during his walk in the public
gardens from Lidia Ivanovna's niece.  This piece of good news
seemed to him particularly important from its coming at the same
time with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own gladness
at toys having come for him.  It seemed to Seryozha that this was
a day on which everyone ought to be glad and happy.

"You know papa's received the Alexander Nevsky today?"

"To be sure I do!  People have been already to congratulate him."

"And is he glad?"

"Glad at the Tsar's gracious favor!  I should think so!  It's a
proof he's deserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.

Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter,
which he had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the
chin that hung down between the gray whiskers, never seen by
anyone but Seryozha, who saw him only from below.

"Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"

The porter's daughter was a ballet dancer.

"When is she to come on week-days?  They've their lessons to
learn too.  And you've your lesson, sir; run along."

On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to his
lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been
brought him must be a machine.  "What do you think?" he inquired.

But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of
learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at
two.

"No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch," he asked suddenly, when
he was seated at their work table with the book in his hands,
"what is greater than the Alexander Nevsky?  You know papa's
received the Alexander Nevsky?"

Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the
Alexander Nevsky.

"And higher still?"

"Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny."

"And higher than the Andrey?"

"I don't know."

"What, you don't know?" and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank
into deep meditation.

His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character.
He imagined his father's having suddenly been presented with both
the Vladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much
better tempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown
up, he would himself receive all the orders, and what they might
invent higher than the Andrey.  Directly any higher order were
invented, he would win it.  They would make a higher one still,
and he would immediately win that too.

The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came,
the lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of
action was not ready, and the teacher was not only displeased,
but hurt.  This touched Seryozha.  He felt he was not to blame
for not having learned the lesson; however much he tried, he was
utterly unable to do that.  As long as the teacher was explaining
to him, he believed him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as
he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollect and to
understand that the short and familiar word "suddenly" is an
adverb of manner of action.  Still he was sorry that he had
disappointed the teacher.

He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the
book.

"Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?" he asked all, of a
sudden.

"You'd much better be thinking about your work.  Birthdays are of
no importance to a rational being.  It's a day like any other on
which one has to do one's work."

Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at
his spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his
nose, and fell into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of
what the teacher was explaining to him.  He knew that the teacher
did not think what he said; he felt it from the tone in which it
was said.  "But why have they all agreed to speak just in the
same manner always the dreariest and most useless stuff?  Why
does he keep me off; why doesn't he love me?" he asked himself
mournfully, and could not think of an answer.



Chapter 27


After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father's
lesson.  While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table
playing with a penknife, and fell to dreaming.  Among Seryozha's
favorite occupations was searching for his mother during his
walks.  He did not believe in death generally, and in her death
in particular, in spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and
his father had confirmed, and it was just because of that, and
after he had been told she was dead, that he had begun looking
for her when out for a walk.  Every woman of full, graceful
figure with dark hair was his mother.  At the sight of such a
woman such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that
his breath failed him, and tears came into his eyes.  And he was
on the tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to him, would
lift her veil.  All her face would be visible, she would smile,
she would hug him, he would sniff her fragrance, feel the
softness of her arms, and cry with happiness, just as he had one
evening lain on her lap while she tickled him, and he laughed and
bit her white, ring-covered fingers.  Later, when he accidentally
learned from his old nurse that his mother was not dead, and his
father and Lidia Ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead
to him because she was wicked (which he could not possibly
believe, because he loved her), he went on seeking her and
expecting her in the same way.  That day in the public gardens
there had been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with a
throbbing heart, believing it to be she as she came towards them
along the path.  The lady had not come up to them, but had
disappeared somewhere.  That day, more intensely than ever,
Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his
father, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the
table with his penknife, staring straight before him with
sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.

"Here is your papa!" said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.

Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his
hand, looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy
at receiving the Alexander Nevsky.

"Did you have a nice walk?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting
down in his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament
to him and opening it.  Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more
than once told Seryozha that every Christian ought to know
Scripture history thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible
himself during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.

"Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said Seryozha, sitting
sideways on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden.  "I
saw Nadinka" (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna's who was
being brought up in her house).  "She told me you'd been given a
new star.  Are you glad, papa?"

"First of all, don't rock your chair, please," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  "And secondly, it's not the reward that's
precious, but the work itself.  And I could have wished you
understood that.  If you now are going to work, to study in order
to win a reward, then the work will seem hard to you; but when
you work" (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as he spoke, thought of how he
had been sustained by a sense of duty through the wearisome labor
of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred and eighty
papers), "loving your work, you will find your reward in it."

Seryozha's eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and
tenderness, grew dull and dropped before his father's gaze.  This
was the same long-familiar tone his father always took with him,
and Seryozha had learned by now to fall in with it.  His father
always talked to him--so Seryozha felt--as though he were
addressing some boy of his own imagination, one of those boys
that exist in books, utterly unlike himself.  And Seryozha always
tried with his father to act being the story-book boy.

"You understand that, I hope?" said his father.

"Yes, papa," answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary
boy.

The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of
the Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old
Testament.  The verses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well,
but at the moment when he was saying them he became so absorbed
in watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of his
father's forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the
end of one verse and the beginning of another.  So it was evident
to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he did not understand what he was
saying, and that irritated him.

He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many
times before and never could remember, because he understood it
too well, just as that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of
action.  Seryozha looked with scared eyes at his father, and
could think of nothing but whether his father would make him
repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did.  And this thought
so alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing.  But his
father did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson
out of the Old Testament.  Seryozha recounted the events
themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions as to
what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he had
already been punished over this lesson.  The passage at which he
was utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and
cutting the table and swinging his chair, was where he had to
repeat the patriarchs before the Flood.  He did not know one of
them, except Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven.  Last
time he had remembered their names, but now he had forgotten them
utterly, chiefly because Enoch was the personage he liked best in
the whole of the Old Testament, and Enoch's translation to heaven
was connected in his mind with a whole long train of thought, in
which he became absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes
at his father's watch-chain and a half-unbuttoned button on his
waistcoat.

In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha
disbelieved entirely.  He did not believe that those he loved
could die, above all that he himself would die.  That was to him
something utterly inconceivable and impossible.  But he had been
told that all men die; he had asked people, indeed, whom he
trusted, and they too, had confirmed it; his old nurse, too, said
the same, though reluctantly.  But Enoch had not died, and so it
followed that everyone did not die.  "And why cannot anyone else
so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thought Seryozha.
Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might die,
but the good might all be like Enoch.

"Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"

"Enoch, Enos--"

"But you have said that already.  This is bad, Seryozha, very
bad.  If you don't try to learn what is more necessary than
anything for a Christian," said his father, getting up, "whatever
can interest you?  I am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch"
(this was the most important of his teachers) "is displeased with
you....  I shall have to punish you."

His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha,
and he certainly did learn his lessons very badly.  But still it
could not be said he was a stupid boy.  On the contrary, he was
far cleverer than the boys his teacher held up as examples to
Seryozha.  In his father's opinion, he did not want to learn what
he was taught.  In reality he could not learn that.  He could
not, because the claims of his own soul were more binding on him
than those claims his father and his teacher made upon him.
Those claims were in opposition, and he was in direct conflict
with his education.  He was nine years old; he was a child; but
he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as
the eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no
one into his soul.  His teachers complained that he would not
learn, while his soul was brimming over with thirst for
knowledge.  And he learned from Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from
Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but not from his teachers.  The
spring his father and his teachers reckoned upon to turn their
mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its waters did
their work in another channel.

His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see
Nadinka, Lidia Ivanovna's niece; but this punishment turned out
happily for Seryozha.  Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and
showed him how to make windmills.  The whole evening passed over
this work and in dreaming how to make a windmill on which he
could turn himself--clutching at the sails or tying himself on
and whirling round.  Of his mother Seryozha did not think all the
evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her,
and prayed in his own words that his mother tomorrow for his
birthday might leave off hiding herself and come to him.

"Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra
besides the regular things?"

"That you might learn your lessons better?"

"No."

"Toys?"

"No.  You'll never guess.  A splendid thing; but it's a secret!
When it comes to pass I'll tell you.  Can't you guess!"

"No, I can't guess.  You tell me," said Vassily Lukitch with a
smile, which was rare with him.  "Come, lie down, I'm putting out
the candle."

"Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed
for.  There!  I was almost telling the secret!" said Seryozha,
laughing gaily.

When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his
mother.  She stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him.
But then came windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed
up, and he fell asleep.



Chapter 28


On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the
best hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with
her child, its nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four
rooms.

On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother's.  There
he found his mother, who had come from Moscow on business.  His
mother and sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him
about his stay abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances,
but did not let drop a single word in allusion to his connection
with Anna.  His brother came the next morning to see Vronsky, and
of his own accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told
him directly that he looked upon his connection with Madame
Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a divorce, and
then to marry her, and until then he considered her as much a
wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother
and his wife so.

"If the world disapproves, I don't care," said Vronsky; "but if
my relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they
will have to be on the same terms with my wife."

The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger
brother's judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or
not till the world had decided the question; for his part he had
nothing against it, and with Alexey he went up to see Anna.

Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna
with a certain formality, treating her as he might a very
intimate friend, but it was understood that his brother knew
their real relations, and they talked about Anna's going to
Vronsky's estate.

In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence
of the new position in which he was placed, laboring under a
strange misapprehension.  One would have thought he must have
understood that society was closed for him and Anna; but now some
vague ideas had sprung up in his brain that this was only the
case in old-fashioned days, and that now with the rapidity of
modern progress (he had unconsciously become by now a partisan of
every sort of progress) the views of society had changed, and
that the question whether they would be received in society was
not a foregone conclusion.  "Of course," he thought, "she would
not be received at court, but intimate friends can and must look
at it in the proper light."  One may sit for several hours at a
stretch with one's legs crossed in the same position, if one
knows that there's nothing to prevent one's changing one's
position; but if a man knows that he must remain sitting so with
crossed legs, then cramps come on, the legs begin to twitch and
to strain towards the spot to which one would like to draw them.
This was what Vronsky was experiencing in regard to the world.
Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that the world was shut
on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not changed
by now and would not receive them.  But he very quickly perceived
that though the world was open for him personally, it was closed
for Anna.  Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised
for him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.

One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw
was his cousin Betsy.

"At last!" she greeted him joyfully.  "And Anna?  How glad I am!
Where are you stopping?  I can fancy after your delightful
travels you must find our poor Petersburg horrid.  I can fancy
your honeymoon in Rome.  How about the divorce?  Is that all
over?"

Vronsky noticed that Betsy's enthusiasm waned when she learned
that no divorce had as yet taken place.

"People will throw stones at me, I know," she said, "but I shall
come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come.  You won't be
here long, I suppose?"

And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone
was not at all the same as in former days.  She unmistakably
prided herself on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the
fidelity of her friendship.  She only stayed ten minutes, talking
of society gossip, and on leaving she said:

"You've never told me when the divorce is to be?  Supposing I'm
ready to fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will
give you the cold shoulder until you're married.  And that's so
simple nowadays.  _Ça se fait_.  So you're going on Friday?  Sorry
we shan't see each other again."

From Betsy's tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to
expect from the world; but he made another effort in his own
family.  His mother he did not reckon upon.  He knew that his
mother, who had been so enthusiastic over Anna at their first
acquaintance, would have no mercy on her now for having ruined
her son's career.  But he had more hope of Varya, his brother's
wife.  He fancied she would not throw stones, and would go simply
and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in her own
house.

The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her
alone, expressed his wishes directly.

"You know, Alexey," she said after hearing him, "how fond I am of
you, and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not
spoken, because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna
Arkadyevna," she said, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna"
with particular care.  "Don't suppose, please, that I judge her.
Never; perhaps in her place I should have done the same.  I don't
and can't enter into that," she said, glancing timidly at his
gloomy face.  "But one must call things by their names.  You want
me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to rehabilitate her in
society; but do understand that I _cannot_ do so.  I have daughters
growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband's sake.
Well, I'm ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she will
understand that I can't ask her here, or I should have to do so
in such a way that she would not meet people who look at things
differently; that would offend her.  I can't raise her..."

"Oh, I don't regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you
do receive!" Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he
got up in silence, understanding that his sister-in-law's
decision was not to be shaken.

"Alexey! don't be angry with me.  Please understand that I'm not
to blame," began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.

"I'm not angry with you," he said still as gloomily; "but I'm
sorry in two ways.  I'm sorry, too, that this means breaking up
our friendship--if not breaking up, at least weakening it.  You
will understand that for me, too, it cannot be otherwise."

And with that he left her.

Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had
to spend these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange
town, avoiding every sort of relation with his own old circle in
order not to be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which
were so intolerable to him.  One of the most unpleasant features
of his position in Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and
his name seemed to meet him everywhere.  He could not begin to
talk of anything without the conversation turning on Alexey
Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere without risk of meeting
him.  So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man
with a sore finger that he is continually, as though on purpose,
grazing his sore finger on everything.

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not
understand in Anna.  At one time she would seem in love with him,
and then she would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable.  She
was worrying over something, and keeping something back from him,
and did not seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his
existence, and for her, with her delicate intuition, must have
been still more unbearable.



Chapter 29


One of Anna's objects in coming back to Russia had been to see
her son.  From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never
ceased to agitate her.  And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the
delight and importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her
imagination.  She did not even put to herself the question how to
arrange it.  It seemed to her natural and simple to see her son
when she should be in the same town with him.  But on her arrival
in Petersburg she was suddenly made distinctly aware of her
present position in society, and she grasped the fact that to
arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

She had now been two days in Petersburg.  The thought of her son
never left her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen
him.  To go straight to the house, where she might meet Alexey
Alexandrovitch, that she felt she had no right to do.  She might
be refused admittance and insulted.  To write and so enter into
relations with her husband--that it made her miserable to think
of doing; she could only be at peace when she did not think of
her husband.  To get a glimpse of her son out walking, finding
out where and when he went out, was not enough for her; she had
so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must say
to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him.  Seryozha's
old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do.  But
the nurse was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch's house.
In this uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days
had slipped by.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write
to her a letter, which cost her great pains, and in which she
intentionally said that permission to see her son must depend on
her husband's generosity.  She knew that if the letter were shown
to her husband, he would keep up his character of magnanimity,
and would not refuse her request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the
most cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer.  She
had never felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for
the commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how
he had waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no
answer.  Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from
her point of view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right.  Her
suffering was the more poignant that she had to bear it in
solitude.  She could not and would not share it with Vronsky.
She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause of her
distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter
of very little consequence.  She knew that he would never be
capable of understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for
his cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate him.
And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she
hid from him everything that related to her son.  Spending the
whole day at home she considered ways of seeing her son, and had
reached a decision to write to her husband.  She was just
composing this letter when she was handed the letter from Lidia
Ivanovna.  The countess's silence had subdued and depressed her,
but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her
passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned
against other people and left off blaming herself.

"This coldness--this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself.
"They must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to
submit to it!  Not on any consideration!  She is worse than I am.
I don't lie, anyway."  And she decided on the spot that next day,
Seryozha's birthday, she would go straight to her husband's
house, bribe or deceive the servants, but at any cost see her son
and overturn the hideous deception with which they were
encompassing the unhappy child.

She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of
action.  She would go early in the morning at eight o'clock, when
Alexey Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up.  She would
have money in her hand to give the hall porter and the footman,
so that they should let her in, and not raising her veil, she
would say that she had come from Seryozha's godfather to
congratulate him, and that she had been charged to leave the toys
at his bedside.  She had prepared everything but the words she
should say to her son.  Often as she had dreamed of it, she could
never think of anything.

The next day, at eight o'clock in the morning, Anna got out of a
hired sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

"Run and see what's wanted.  Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who,
not yet dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of
the window and seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the
door.  His assistant, a lad Anna did not know, had no sooner
opened the door to her than she came in, and pulling a
three-rouble note out of her muff put it hurriedly into his hand.

"Seryozha--Sergey Alexeitch," she said, and was going on.
Scrutinizing the note, the porter's assistant stopped her at the
second glass door.

"Whom do you want?" he asked.

She did not hear his words and made no answer.

Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went
out to her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what
she was pleased to want.

"From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," she said.

"His honor's not up yet," said the porter, looking at her
attentively.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of
the house where she had lived for nine years would so greatly
affect her.  Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in
her heart, and for a moment she forgot what she was here for.

"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur
cloak.

As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face,
recognized her, and made her a low bow in silence.

"Please walk in, your excellency," he said to her.

She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any
sound; with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went
with light, swift steps up the stairs.  Bent double, and his
galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying
to overtake her.

"The tutor's there; maybe he's not dressed.  I'll let him know."

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what
the old man was saying.

"This way, to the left, if you please.  Excuse its not being
tidy.  His honor's in the old parlor now," the hall porter said,
panting.  "Excuse me, wait a little, your excellency; I'll just
see," he said, and overtaking her, he opened the high door and
disappeared behind it.  Anna stood still waiting.  "He's only
just awake," said the hall porter, coming out.  And at the very
instant the porter said this, Anna caught the sound of a childish
yawn.  From the sound of this yawn alone she knew her son and
seemed to see him living before her eyes.

"Let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high
doorway.  On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in
the bed was the boy.  His little body bent forward with his
nightshirt unbuttoned, he was stretching and still yawning.  The
instant his lips came together they curved into a blissfully
sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and deliciously
rolled back again.

"Seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.

When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she
had been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured
him as he was at four years old, when she had loved him most of
all.  Now he was not even the same as when she had left him; he
was still further from the four-year-old baby, more grown and
thinner.  How thin his face was, how short his hair was!  What
long hands!  How he had changed since she left him!  But it was
he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and broad little
shoulders.

"Seryozha!" she repeated just in the child's ear.

He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head
from side to side as though looking for something, and opened his
eyes.  Slowly and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at
his mother standing motionless before him, then all at once he
smiled a blissful smile, and shutting his eyes, rolled not
backwards but towards her into her arms.

"Seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting
her arms round his plump little body.  "Mother!" he said,
wriggling about in her arms so as to touch her hands with
different parts of him.

Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms
round her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious
sleepy warmth and fragrance that is only found in children, and
began rubbing his face against her neck and shoulders.

"I know," he said, opening his eyes; "it's my birthday today.  I
knew you'd come.  I'll get up directly."

And saying that he dropped asleep.

Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed
in her absence.  She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so
long now, that were thrust out below the quilt, those
short-cropped curls on his neck in which she had so often kissed
him.  She touched all this and could say nothing; tears choked
her.

"What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking completely up.
"Mother, what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.

"I won't cry...I'm crying for joy.  It's so long since I've seen
you.  I won't, I won't," she said, gulping down her tears and
turning away.  "Come, it's time for you to dress now," she added,
after a pause, and, never letting go his hands, she sat down by
his bedside on the chair, where his clothes were put ready for
him.

"How do you dress without me? How..." she tried to begin talking
simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned
away.

"I don't have a cold bath, papa didn't order it.  And you've not
seen Vassily Lukitch?  He'll come in soon.  Why, you're sitting
on my clothes!"

And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter.  She looked at him
and smiled.

"Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her
again and hugging her.  It was as though only now, on seeing her
smile, he fully grasped what had happened.

"I don't want that on," he said, taking off her hat.  And as it
were, seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her
again.

"But what did you think about me?  You didn't think I was dead?"

"I never believed it."

"You didn't believe it, my sweet?"

"I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching
the hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to
his mouth and kissed it.



Chapter 30


Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this
lady was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no
other person than the mother who had left her husband, and whom
he had not seen, as he had entered the house after her departure.
He was in doubt whether to go in or not, or whether to
communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch.  Reflecting finally that
his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that it
was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the
mother or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished
dressing, went to the door and opened it.

But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their
voices, and what they were saying, made him change his mind.

He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door.  "I'll
wait another ten minutes," he said to himself, clearing his
throat and wiping away tears.

Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement
all this time.  All had heard that their mistress had come, and
that Kapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the
nursery, and that their master always went in person to the
nursery at nine o'clock, and every one fully comprehended that it
was impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they
must prevent it.  Korney, the valet, going down to the
hall porter's room, asked who had let her in, and how it was he
had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had admitted her
and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to.  The
hall porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he
ought to be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving
his hands in Korney's face, began:

"Oh yes, to be sure you'd not have let her in!  After ten years'
service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you'd up and
say, 'Be off, go along, get away with you!'  Oh yes, you're a
shrewd one at politics, I dare say!  You don't need to be taught
how to swindle the master, and to filch fur coats!"

"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse
who was coming in.  "Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he
let her in without a word to anyone," Korney said addressing
her.  "Alexey Alexandrovitch will be down immediately--and go
into the nursery!"

"A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse.  "You,
Korney Vassilievitch, you'd best keep him some way or other, the
master, while I'll run and get her away somehow.  A pretty
business!"

When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his
mother how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill,
and had turned over three times.  She was listening to the sound
of his voice, watching his face and the play of expression on it,
touching his hand, but she did not follow what he was saying.
She must go, she must leave him,--this was the only thing she was
thinking and feeling.  She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch
coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of
the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned to stone,
incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.

"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and
kissing her hands and shoulders.  "God has brought joy indeed to
our boy on his birthday.  You aren't changed one bit."

"Oh, nurse dear, I didn't know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

"I'm not living here, I'm living with my daughter.  I came for
the birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"

The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand
again.

Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one
hand and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat
little bare feet.  The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to
his mother threw him into an ecstasy.

"Mother!  She often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he
was beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying
something in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother's
face there was a look of dread and something like shame, which
was so strangely unbecoming to her.

She went up to him.

"My sweet!" she said.

She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said
it, and he understood.  "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the
name by which she had called him when he was little, "you won't
forget me?  You..." but she could not say more.

How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said.
But now she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing.
But Seryozha knew all she wanted to say to him.  He understood
that she was unhappy and loved him.  He understood even what the
nurse had whispered.  He had caught the words "always at nine
o'clock," and he knew that this was said of his father, and that
his father and mother could not meet.  That he understood, but
one thing he could not understand--why there should be a look of
dread and shame in her face?...  She was not in fault, but she
was afraid of him and ashamed of something.  He would have liked
to put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he
did not dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her.
Silently he pressed close to her and whispered, "Don't go yet.
He won't come just yet."

The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking,
what to say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only
that he was speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her
what he ought to think about his father.

"Seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he's better and
kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong.  When you grow up
you will judge."

"There's no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through
his tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began
squeezing her with all his force to him, his arms trembling with
the strain.

"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

At that moment the door opened.  Vassily Lukitch came in.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in
a scared whisper said, "He's coming," and gave Anna her hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his
hands.  Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face,
and with rapid steps went to the door.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
walked in, meeting her.  Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed
his head.

Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in
the rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in
all its details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and
jealousy over her son took possession of her.  With a swift
gesture she put down her veil, and, quickening her pace, almost
ran out of the room.

She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the
parcel of toys she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with
such love and sorrow.



Chapter 31


As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she
had been thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had
not in the least expected that seeing him would affect her so
deeply.  On getting back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she
could not for a long while understand why she was there.  "Yes,
it's all over, and I am again alone," she said to herself, and
without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chair by the
hearth.  Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table
between the windows, she tried to think.

The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should
dress.  She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Presently." A
footman offered her coffee.  "Later on," she said.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best,
came in with her, and brought her to Anna.  The plump, well-fed
little baby, on seeing her mother, as she always did, held out
her fat little hands, and with a smile on her toothless mouth,
began, like a fish with a float, bobbing her fingers up and down
the starched folds of her embroidered skirt, making them rustle.
It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible
not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing and prancing
all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she sucked into
her little mouth by way of a kiss.  And all this Anna did, and
took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh
little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this
child it was plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had
for her could not be called love in comparison with what she felt
for Seryozha.  Everything in this baby was charming, but for some
reason all this did not go deep to her heart.  On her first
child, though the child of an unloved father, had been
concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.  Her
baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child.  Besides, in the little girl
everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now
almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved.  In him
there was a conflict of thought and feeling; he understood her,
he loved her, he judged her, she thought, recalling his words and
his eyes.  And she was forever--not physically only but
spiritually--divided from him, and it was impossible to set this
right.

She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the
locket in which there was Seryozha's portrait when he was almost
of the same age as the girl.  She got up, and, taking off her
hat, took up from a little table an album in which there were
photographs of her son at different ages.  She wanted to compare
them, and began taking them out of the album.  She took them all
out except one, the latest and best photograph.  In it he was in
a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with frowning eyes and
smiling lips.  It was his best, most characteristic expression.
With her little supple hands, her white, delicate fingers, that
moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner of
the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and she
could not get it out.  There was no paper knife on the table, and
so, pulling out the photograph that was next to her son's (it was
a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with
long hair), she used it to push out her son's photograph.  "Oh,
here is he!" she said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and
she suddenly recalled that he was the cause of her present
misery.  She had not once thought of him all the morning.  But
now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar
and so dear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.

"But where is he?  How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?"
she thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting
she had herself kept from him everything concerning her son.  She
sent to ask him to come to her immediately; with a throbbing
heart she awaited him, rehearsing to herself the words in which
she would tell him all, and the expressions of love with which he
would console her.  The messenger returned with the answer that
he had a visitor with him, but that he would come immediately,
and that he asked whether she would let him bring with him Prince
Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.  "He's not coming
alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," she
thought; "he's not coming so that I could tell him everything,
but coming with Yashvin."  And all at once a strange idea came to
her: what if he had ceased to love her?

And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her
that she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea.
The fact that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact
that he had insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in
Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming to her alone, as
though he were trying to avoid meeting her face to face.

"But he ought to tell me so.  I must know that it is so.  If I
knew it, then I know what I should do," she said to herself,
utterly unable to picture to herself the position she would be in
if she were convinced of his not caring for her.  She thought he
had ceased to love her, she felt close upon despair, and
consequently she felt exceptionally alert.  She rang for her maid
and went to her dressing room.  As she dressed, she took more
care over her appearance than she had done all those days, as
though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with
her again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the
way most becoming to her.

She heard the bell ring before she was ready.  When she went into
the drawing room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes.
Vronsky was looking through the photographs of her son, which she
had forgotten on the table, and he made no haste to look round at
her.

"We have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the
huge hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of
keeping with his immense frame and coarse face.  "We met last
year at the races.  Give them to me," she said, with a rapid
movement snatching from Vronsky the photographs of her son, and
glancing significantly at him with flashing eyes.  "Were the
races good this year?  Instead of them I saw the races in the
Corso in Rome.  But you don't care for life abroad," she said
with a cordial smile.  "I know you and all your tastes, though I
have seen so little of you."

"I'm awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.

Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced
at the clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much
longer in Petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after
his cap.

"Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.

"So then we shan't meet again?"

"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed
with herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always
did when she defined her position before a fresh person.  "The
dinner here is not good, but at least you will see him.  There is
no one of his old friends in the regiment Alexey cares for as he
does for you."

"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could
see that he liked Anna very much.

Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.

"Are you going too?" she said to him.

"I'm late already," he answered.  "Run along!  I'll catch you up
in a moment," he called to Yashvin.

She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him,
gazed at him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say
that would keep him.

"Wait a minute, there's something I want to say to you," and
taking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck.  "Oh, was it
right my asking him to dinner?"

"You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed
his even teeth, and he kissed her hand.

"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand
in both of hers.  "Alexey, I am miserable here.  When are we
going away?"

"Soon, soon.  You wouldn't believe how disagreeable our way of
living here is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.

"Well, go, go!" she said in a tone of offense, and she walked
quickly away from him.



Chapter 32


When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home.  Soon after he
had left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and
she had gone out with her.  That she had gone out without leaving
word where she was going, that she had not yet come back, and
that all the morning she had been going about somewhere without a
word to him--all this, together with the strange look of
excitement in her face in the morning, and the recollection of
the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvin almost
snatched her son's photographs out of his hands, made him
serious.  He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her.
And he waited for her in her drawing room.  But Anna did not
return alone, but brought with her her old unmarried aunt,
Princess Oblonskaya.  This was the lady who had come in the
morning, and with whom Anna had gone out shopping.  Anna appeared
not to notice Vronsky's worried and inquiring expression, and
began a lively account of her morning's shopping.  He saw that
there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes,
when they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense
concentration, and in her words and movements there was that
nervous rapidity and grace which, during the early period of
their intimacy, had so fascinated him, but which now so disturbed
and alarmed him.

The dinner was laid for four.  All were gathered together and
about to go into the little dining room when Tushkevitch made his
appearance with a message from Princess Betsy.  Princess Betsy
begged her to excuse her not having come to say good-bye; she had
been indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between half-past
six and nine o'clock.  Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise
limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she
should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.

"Very sorry that I can't come just between half-past six and
nine," she said with a faint smile.

"The princess will be very sorry."

"And so am I."

"You're going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevitch.

"Patti?  You suggest the idea to me.  I would go if it were
possible to get a box."

"I can get one," Tushkevitch offered his services.

"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna.  "But won't
you dine with us?"

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug.  He was at a complete
loss to understand what Anna was about.  What had she brought the
old Princess Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch
stay to dinner for, and, most amazing of all, why was she sending
him for a box?  Could she possibly think in her position of going
to Patti's benefit, where all the circle of her acquaintances
would be?  He looked at her with serious eyes, but she responded
with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the
meaning of which he could not comprehend.  At dinner Anna was in
aggressively high spirits--she almost flirted both with
Tushkevitch and with Yashvin.  When they got up from dinner and
Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to
smoke, and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms.  After
sitting there for some time he ran upstairs.  Anna was already
dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she
had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head,
framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her
dazzling beauty.

"Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to
look at her.

"Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his
not looking at her.  "Why shouldn't I go?"

She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.

"Oh, of course, there's no reason whatever," he said, frowning.

"That's just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the
irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed
glove.

"Anna, for God's sake! what is the matter with you?" he said,
appealing to her exactly as once her husband had done.

"I don't understand what you are asking."

"You know that it's out of the question to go."

"Why so?  I'm not going alone.  Princess Varvara has gone to
