Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared
into a compartment.

On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts
of "hurrah!" and _"jivio!"_  One of the volunteers, a tall, very
young man with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous,
bowing and waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his head.  Then
two officers emerged, bowing too, and a stout man with a big
beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.



Chapter 3


Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by
Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing,
and the train started.

At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men
singing "Hail to Thee!"  Again the volunteers bowed and poked
their heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them.
He had had so much to do with the volunteers that the type was
familiar to him and did not interest him.  Katavasov, whose
scientific work had prevented his having a chance of observing
them hitherto, was very much interested in them and questioned
Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and
talk to them himself.  At the next station Katavasov acted on
this suggestion.

At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the
acquaintance of the volunteers.  They were sitting in a corner of
the carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the
attention of the passengers and Katavasov as he got in was
concentrated upon them.  More loudly than all talked the tall,
hollow-chested young man.  He was unmistakably tipsy, and was
relating some story that had occurred at his school.  Facing him
sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian military jacket of the
Guards uniform.  He was listening with a smile to the hollow-
chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up.  The third, in an
artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them.  A fourth
was asleep.

Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that
he was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large
fortune before he was two-and-twenty.  Katavasov did not like
him, because he was unmanly and effeminate and sickly.  He was
obviously convinced, especially now after drinking, that he was
performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in the most
unpleasant way.

The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression
too upon Katavasov.  He was, it seemed, a man who had tried
everything.  He had been on a railway, had been a land-steward,
and had started factories, and he talked, quite without
necessity, of all he had done, and used learned expressions quite
inappropriately.

The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov
very favorably.  He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably
impressed by the knowledge of the officer and the heroic
self-sacrifice of the merchant and saying nothing about himself.
When Katavasov asked him what had impelled him to go to Servia,
he answered modestly:

"Oh, well, everyone's going.  The Servians want help, too.  I'm
sorry for them."

"Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there," said
Katavasov.

"Oh, I wasn't long in the artillery, maybe they'll put me into
the infantry or the cavalry."

"Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?"
said Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman's apparent age
that he must have reached a fairly high grade.

"I wasn't long in the artillery; I'm a cadet retired," he said,
and he began to explain how he had failed in his examination.

All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov,
and when the volunteers got out at a station for a drink,
Katavasov would have liked to compare his unfavorable impression
in conversation with someone.  There was an old man in the
carriage, wearing a military overcoat, who had been listening all
the while to Katavasov's conversation with the volunteers.  When
they were left alone, Katavasov addressed him.

"What different positions they come from, all those fellows who
are going off there," Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to
express his own opinion, and at the same time anxious to find out
the old man's views.

The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns.  He
knew what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the
talk of those persons, by the swagger with which they had
recourse to the bottle on the journey, he considered them poor
soldiers.  Moreover, he lived in a district town, and he was
longing to tell how one soldier had volunteered from his town, a
drunkard and a thief whom no one would employ as a laborer.  But
knowing by experience that in the present condition of the public
temper it was dangerous to express an opinion opposed to the
general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers
unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.

"Well, men are wanted there," he said, laughing with his eyes.
And they fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed
from the other his perplexity as to the engagement expected next
day, since the Turks had been beaten, according to the latest
news, at all points.  And so they parted, neither giving
expression to his opinion.

Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant
hypocrisy reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the
volunteers, from which it would appear that they were capital
fellows.

At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with
shouts and singing, again men and women with collecting boxes
appeared, and provincial ladies brought bouquets to the
volunteers and followed them into the refreshment room; but all
this was on a much smaller and feebler scale than in Moscow.



Chapter 4


While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey
Ivanovitch did not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and
down the platform.

The first time he passed Vronsky's compartment he noticed that
the curtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the
second time he saw the old countess at the window.  She beckoned
to Koznishev.

"I'm going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk," she said.

"Yes, so I heard," said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window
and peeping in.  "What a noble act on his part!" he added,
noticing that Vronsky was not in the compartment.

"Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?"

"What a terrible thing it was!" said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Ah, what I have been through!  But do get in....  Ah, what I
have been through!" she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got
in and sat down beside her.  "You can't conceive it!  For six
weeks he did not speak to anyone, and would not touch food
except when I implored him.  And not for one minute could we
leave him alone.  We took away everything he could have used
against himself.  We lived on the ground floor, but there was no
reckoning on anything.  You know, of course, that he had shot
himself once already on her account," she said, and the old
lady's eyelashes twitched at the recollection.  "Yes, hers was
the fitting end for such a woman.  Even the death she chose was
low and vulgar."

"It's not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch;
"but I can understand that it has been very hard for you."

"Ah, don't speak of it!  I was staying on my estate, and he was
with me.  A note was brought him.  He wrote an answer and sent it
off.  We hadn't an idea that she was close by at the station.  In
the evening I had only just gone to my room, when my Mary told me
a lady had thrown herself under the train.  Something seemed to
strike me at once.  I knew it was she.  The first thing I said
was, he was not to be told.  But they'd told him already.  His
coachman was there and saw it all.  When I ran into his room, he
was beside himself--it was fearful to see him.  He didn't say a
word, but galloped off there.  I don't know to this day what
happened there, but he was brought back at death's door.  I
shouldn't have known him.  _Prostration complete,_ the doctor said.
And that was followed almost by madness.  Oh, why talk of it!"
said the countess with a wave of her hand.  "It was an awful
time!  No, say what you will, she was a bad woman.  Why, what is
the meaning of such desperate passions?  It was all to show
herself something out of the way.  Well, and that she did do.
She brought herself to ruin and two good men--her husband and my
unhappy son."

"And what did her husband do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"He has taken her daughter.  Alexey was ready to agree to
anything at first.  Now it worries him terribly that he should
have given his own child away to another man.  But he can't take
back his word.  Karenin came to the funeral.  But we tried to
prevent his meeting Alexey.  For him, for her husband, it was
easier, anyway.  She had set him free.  But my poor son was
utterly given up to her.  He had thrown up everything, his
career, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set
purpose she made his ruin complete.  No, say what you will, her
very death was the death of a vile woman, of no religious
feeling.  God forgive me, but I can't help hating the memory of
her, when I look at my son's misery!"

"But how is he now?"

"It was a blessing from Providence for us--this Servian war.  I'm
old, and I don't understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it's
come as a providential blessing to him.  Of course for me, as his
mother, it's terrible; and what's worse, they say, _ce n'est pas
très bien vu a Pétersbourg_.  But it can't be helped!  It was the
one thing that could rouse him.  Yashvin--a friend of his--he had
lost all he had at cards and he was going to Servia.  He came to
see him and persuaded him to go.  Now it's an interest for him.
Do please talk to him a little.  I want to distract his mind.
He's so low-spirited.  And as bad luck would have it, he has
toothache too.  But he'll be delighted to see you.  Please do
talk to him; he's walking up and down on that side."

Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over
to the other side of the station.



Chapter 5


In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on
the platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with
his hands in his pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast
in a cage, turning sharply after twenty paces.  Sergey Ivanovitch
fancied, as he approached him, that Vronsky saw him but was
pretending not to see.  This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in
the slightest.  He was above all personal considerations with
Vronsky.

At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man
taking an important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought
it his duty to encourage him and express his approval.  He went
up to him.

Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and
going a few steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very
warmly.

"Possibly you didn't wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
"but couldn't I be of use to you?"

"There's no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said
Vronsky.  "Excuse me; and there's nothing in life for me to
like."

"I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my
services," said Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky's face, full
of unmistakable suffering.  "Wouldn't it be of use to you to have
a letter to Ristitch--to Milan?"

"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with
difficulty.  "If you don't mind, let's walk on.  It's so stuffy
among the carriages.  A letter?  No, thank you; to meet death one
needs no letters of introduction.  Nor for the Turks..." he said,
with a smile that was merely of the lips.  His eyes still kept
their look of angry suffering.

"Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which
are after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you.  But
that's as you like.  I was very glad to hear of your intention.
There have been so many attacks made on the volunteers, and a man
like you raises them in public estimation."

"My use as a man," said Vronsky, "is that life's worth nothing to
me.  And that I've enough bodily energy to cut my way into their
ranks, and to trample on them or fall--I know that.  I'm glad
there's something to give my life for, for it's not simply
useless but loathsome to me.  Anyone's welcome to it."  And his
jaw twitched impatiently from the incessant gnawing toothache,
that prevented him from even speaking with a natural expression.

"You will become another man, I predict," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, feeling touched.  "To deliver one's brother-men from
bondage is an aim worth death and life.  God grant you success
outwardly--and inwardly peace," he added, and he held out his
hand.  Vronsky warmly pressed his outstretched hand.

"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use.  But as a man, I'm a
wreck," he jerked out.

He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth,
that were like rows of ivory in his mouth.  He was silent, and
his eyes rested on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly
rolling along the rails.

And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner
trouble, that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an
instant forget his toothache.  As he glanced at the tender and
the rails, under the influence of the conversation with a friend
he had not met since his misfortune, he suddenly recalled
_her_--that is, what was left of her when he had run like one
distraught into the cloak room of the railway station--on the
table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt
dropping back with its weight of hair, and the curling tresses
about the temples, and the exquisite face, with red, half-opened
mouth, the strange, fixed expression, piteous on the lips and
awful in the still open eyes, that seemed to utter that fearful
phrase--that he would be sorry for it--that she had said when
they were quarreling.

And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first
time, at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving,
seeking and giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he
remembered her on that last moment.  He tried to recall his best
moments with her, but those moments were poisoned forever.  He
could only think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace
of a wholly useless remorse never to be effaced.  He lost all
consciousness of toothache, and his face worked with sobs.

Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and
regaining his self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch
calmly:

"You have had no telegrams since yesterday's?  Yes, driven back
for a third time, but a decisive engagement expected for
tomorrow."

And after talking a little more of King Milan's proclamation, and
the immense effect it might have, they parted, going to their
carriages on hearing the second bell.



Chapter 6


Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to
meet him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave
Moscow.  Levin was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey
Ivanovitch in a fly hired at the station drove up to the steps of
the Pokrovskoe house, as black as Moors from the dust of the
road.  Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her father and sister,
recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet him.

"What a shame not to have let us know," she said, giving her hand
to Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to
kiss.

"We drove here capitally, and have not put you out," answered
Sergey Ivanovitch.  "I'm so dirty.  I'm afraid to touch you.
I've been so busy, I didn't know when I should be able to tear
myself away.  And so you're still as ever enjoying your peaceful,
quiet happiness," he said, smiling, "out of the reach of the
current in your peaceful backwater.  Here's our friend Fyodor
Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting here at last."

"But I'm not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I
wash," said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands
and smiled, his teeth flashing white in his black face.

"Kostya will be delighted.  He has gone to his settlement.  It's
time he should be home."

"Busy as ever with his farming.  It really is a peaceful
backwater," said Katavasov; "while we in town think of nothing
but the Servian war.  Well, how does our friend look at it?  He's
sure not to think like other people."

"Oh, I don't know, like everybody else," Kitty answered, a little
embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch.  "I'll send to
fetch him.  Papa's staying with us.  He's only just come home
from abroad."

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to
wash, one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly's, and
giving orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony,
enjoying the freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had
been deprived during the months of her pregnancy.

"It's Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor," she said.

"Oh, that's a bore in this heat," said the prince.

"No, papa, he's very nice, and Kostya's very fond of him," Kitty
said, with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her
father's face.

"Oh, I didn't say anything."

"You go to them, darling," said Kitty to her sister, "and
entertain them.  They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite
well.  And I must run to Mitya.  As ill-luck would have it, I
haven't fed him since tea.  He's awake now, and sure to be
screaming."  And feeling a rush of milk, she hurried to the
nursery.

This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was
still so close, that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his
need of food, and knew for certain he was hungry.

She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery.  And he
was indeed crying.  She heard him and hastened.  But the faster
she went, the louder he screamed.  It was a fine healthy scream,
hungry and impatient.

"Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kitty
hurriedly, seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the
baby the breast.  "But give me him quickly.  Oh, nurse, how
tiresome you are!  There, tie the cap afterwards, do!"

The baby's greedy scream was passing into sobs.

"But you can't manage so, ma'am," said Agafea Mihalovna, who was
almost always to be found in the nursery.  "He must be put
straight.  A-oo! a-oo!" she chanted over him, paying no attention
to the mother.

The nurse brought the baby to his mother.  Agafea Mihalovna
followed him with a face dissolving with tenderness.

"He knows me, he knows me.  In God's faith, Katerina
Alexandrovna, ma'am, he knew me!" Agafea Mihalovna cried above
the baby's screams.

But Kitty did not hear her words.  Her impatience kept growing,
like the baby's.

Their impatience hindered things for a while.  The baby could not
get hold of the breast right, and was furious.

At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain
sucking, things went right, and mother and child felt
simultaneously soothed, and both subsided into calm.

"But poor darling, he's all in perspiration!" said Kitty in a
whisper, touching the baby.

"What makes you think he knows you?" she added, with a sidelong
glance at the baby's eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied,
from under his cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the
little red-palmed hand he was waving.

"Impossible!  If he knew anyone, he would have known me," said
Kitty, in response to Agafea Mihalovna's statement, and she
smiled.

She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her
heart she was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but
that he knew and understood everything, and knew and understood a
great deal too that no one else knew, and that she, his mother,
had learned and come to understand only through him.  To Agafea
Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father even,
Mitya was a living being, requiring only material care, but for
his mother he had long been a mortal being, with whom there had
been a whole series of spiritual relations already.

"When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself.  Then
when I do like this, he simply beams on me, the darling!  Simply
beams like a sunny day!" said Agafea Mihalovna.

"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kitty.  "But now go
away, he's going to sleep."



Chapter 7


Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the
blind, chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib,
and a bumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down
waving a faded branch of birch over the mother and the baby.

"How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain," she said.

"Yes, yes, sh--sh--sh--" was all Kitty answered, rocking a
little, and tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls
of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened
and shut his eyes.  That hand worried Kitty; she longed to kiss
the little hand, but was afraid to for fear of waking the baby.
At last the little hand ceased waving, and the eyes closed.  Only
from time to time, as he went on sucking, the baby raised his
long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes,
that looked black in the twilight.  The nurse had left off
fanning, and was dozing.  From above came the peals of the old
prince's voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.

"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still
it's vexing that Kostya's out.  He's sure to have gone to the
bee house again.  Though it's a pity he's there so often, still
I'm glad.  It distracts his mind.  He's become altogether happier
and better now than in the spring.  He used to be so gloomy and
worried that I felt frightened for him.  And how absurd he is!"
she whispered, smiling.

She knew what worried her husband.  It was his unbelief.
Although, if she had been asked whether she supposed that in the
future life, if he did not believe, he would be damned, she would
have had to admit that he would be damned, his unbelief did not
cause her unhappiness.  And she, confessing that for an
unbeliever there can be no salvation, and loving her husband's
soul more than anything in the world, thought with a smile of his
unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.

"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this
year?" she wondered.  "If it's all written in those books, he can
understand them.  If it's all wrong, why does he read them?  He
says himself that he would like to believe.  Then why is it he
doesn't believe?  Surely from his thinking so much?  And he
thinks so much from being solitary.  He's always alone, alone.
He can't talk about it all to us.  I fancy he'll be glad of these
visitors, especially Katavasov.  He likes discussions with them,"
she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or
to share Sergey Ivanovitch's room.  And then an idea suddenly
struck her, which made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who
glanced severely at her.  "I do believe the laundress hasn't sent
the washing yet, and all the best sheets are in use.  If I don't
see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong
sheets," and at the very idea of this the blood rushed to Kitty's
face.

"Yes, I will arrange it," she decided, and going back to her
former thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of
importance had been interrupted, and she began to recall what.
"Yes, Kostya, an unbeliever," she thought again with a smile.

"Well, an unbeliever then!  Better let him always be one than
like Madame Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad.
No, he won't ever sham anything."

And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind.
A fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan
Arkadyevitch to Dolly.  He besought her to save his honor, to
sell her estate to pay his debts.  Dolly was in despair, she
detested her husband, despised him, pitied him, resolved on a
separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by agreeing to sell
part of her property.  After that, with an irrepressible smile of
tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband's shamefaced
embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the
subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means of
helping Dolly without wounding her pride, he had suggested to
Kitty--what had not occurred to her before--that she should give
up her share of the property.

"He an unbeliever indeed!  With his heart, his dread of offending
anyone, even a child!  Everything for others, nothing for
himself.  Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya's duty
to be his steward.  And it's the same with his sister.  Now Dolly
and her children are under his guardianship; all these peasants
who come to him every day, as though he were bound to be at their
service."

"Yes, only be like your father, only like him," she said, handing
Mitya over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.



Chapter 8


Ever since, by his beloved brother's deathbed, Levin had first
glanced into the questions of life and death in the light of
these new convictions, as he called them, which had during the
period from his twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly
replaced his childish and youthful beliefs--he had been stricken
with horror, not so much of death, as of life, without any
knowledge of whence, and why, and how, and what it was.  The
physical organization, its decay, the indestructibility of
matter, the law of the conservation of energy, evolution, were
the words which usurped the place of his old belief.  These words
and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes.  But for life they yielded nothing, and
Levin felt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak
for a muslin garment, and going for the first time into the frost
is immediately convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature
that he is as good as naked, and that he must infallibly perish
miserably.

From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still
went on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of
terror at his lack of knowledge.

He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions
were not merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a
whole order of ideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was
possible.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with
it, had completely crowded out these thoughts.  But of late,
while he was staying in Moscow after his wife's confinement, with
nothing to do, the question that clamored for solution had more
and more often, more and more insistently, haunted Levin's mind.

The question was summed up for him thus: "If I do not accept the
answers Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what
answers do I accept?"  And in the whole arsenal of his
convictions, so far from finding any satisfactory answers, he was
utterly unable to find anything at all like an answer.

He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and
tool shops.

Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every
conversation, with every man he met, he was on the lookout for
light on these questions and their solution.

What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the
majority of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged
their old beliefs for the same new convictions, and yet saw
nothing to lament in this, and were perfectly satisfied and
serene.  So that, apart from the principal question, Levin was
tortured by other questions too.  Were these people sincere? he
asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it that they
understood the answers science gave to these problems in some
different, clearer sense than he did?  And he assiduously studied
both these men's opinions and the books which treated of these
scientific explanations.

One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his
mind, was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the
recollections of the circle of his young days at college, that
religion had outlived its day, and that it was now practically
non-existent.  All the people nearest to him who were good in
their lives were believers.  The old prince, and Lvov, whom he
liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all the women believed,
and his wife believed as simply as he had believed in his
earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest
respect, believed.

Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many
scientific books, was that the men who shared his views had no
other construction to put on them, and that they gave no
explanation of the questions which he felt he could not live
without answering, but simply ignored their existence and
attempted to explain other questions of no possible interest to
him, such as the evolution of organisms, the materialistic theory
of consciousness, and so forth.

Moreover, during his wife's confinement, something had happened
that seemed extraordinary to him.  He, an unbeliever, had fallen
into praying, and at the moment he prayed, he believed.  But that
moment had passed, and he could not make his state of mind at
that moment fit into the rest of his life.

He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and
that now he was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly
about it, it all fell to pieces.  He could not admit that he was
mistaken then, for his spiritual condition then was precious to
him, and to admit that it was a proof of weakness would have been
to desecrate those moments.  He was miserably divided against
himself, and strained all his spiritual forces to the utmost to
escape from this condition.



Chapter 9


These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger
from time to time, but never leaving him.  He read and thought,
and the more he read and the more he thought, the further he felt
from the aim he was pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become
convinced that he would find no solution in the materialists, he
had read and re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling,
Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a
non-materialistic explanation of life.

Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was
himself seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially
those of the materialists; but as soon as he began to read or
sought for himself a solution of problems, the same thing always
happened.  As long as he followed the fixed definition of obscure
words such as _spirit, will, freedom, essence,_ purposely letting
himself go into the snare of words the philosophers set for him,
he seemed to comprehend something.  But he had only to forget the
artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from life itself to
what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with the
fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces
at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the
edifice had been built up out of those transposed words, apart
from anything in life more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will
the word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy
charmed him, till he removed a little away from it.  But then,
when he turned from life itself to glance at it again, it fell
away too, and proved to be the same muslin garment with no warmth
in it.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological
works of Homiakov.  Levin read the second volume of Homiakov's
works, and in spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative
style which at first repelled him, he was impressed by the
doctrine of the church he found in them.  He was struck at first
by the idea that the apprehension of divine truths had not been
vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound together by
love--to the church.  What delighted him was the thought how much
easier it was to believe in a still existing living church,
embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and
therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in
God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin
with God, a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc.  But
afterwards, on reading a Catholic writer's history of the church,
and then a Greek orthodox writer's history of the church, and
seeing that the two churches, in their very conception
infallible, each deny the authority of the other, Homiakov's
doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this
edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers' edifices.

All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful
moments of horror.

"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life's impossible;
and that I can't know, and so I can't live," Levin said to
himself.

"In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is
formed a bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and
bursts, and that bubble is Me."

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of
ages of human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated
by human thought in almost all their ramifications rested.  It
was the prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin
had unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway
the clearest, and made it his own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some
wicked power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not
submit.

He must escape from this power.  And the means of escape every
man had in his own hands.  He had but to cut short this
dependence on evil.  And there was one means--death.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was
several times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might
not be tempted to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his
gun for fear of shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he
went on living.



Chapter 10


When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he
could find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair,
but he left off questioning himself about it.  It seemed as
though he knew both what he was and for what he was living, for
he acted and lived resolutely and without hesitation.  Indeed, in
these latter days he was far more decided and unhesitating in
life than he had ever been.

When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he
went back also to his usual pursuits.  The management of the
estate, his relations with the peasants and the neighbors, the
care of his household, the management of his sister's and
brother's property, of which he had the direction, his relations
with his wife and kindred, the care of his child, and the new
bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filled all his
time.

These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to
himself by any sort of general principles, as he had done in
former days; on the contrary, disappointed by the failure of his
former efforts for the general welfare, and too much occupied
with his own thought and the mass of business with which he was
burdened from all sides, he had completely given up thinking of
the general good, and he busied himself with all this work simply
because it seemed to him that he must do what he was doing--that
he could not do otherwise.  In former days--almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood--when he had tried
to do anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for
Russia, for the whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it
had been pleasant, but the work itself had always been
incoherent, that then he had never had a full conviction of its
absolute necessity, and that the work that had begun by seeming
so great, had grown less and less, till it vanished into nothing.
But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confine himself
more and more to living for himself, though he experienced no
delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt a
complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far
better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and
more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into
the soil like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without
turning aside the furrow.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers--that
is, in the same condition of culture--and to bring up his
children in the same, was incontestably necessary.  It was as
necessary as dining when one was hungry.  And to do this, just as
it was necessary to cook dinner, it was necessary to keep the
mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an
income.  Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a
debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition
that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank
you" to his father as Levin had said "thank you" to his
grandfather for all he built and planted.  And to do this it was
necessary to look after the land himself, not to let it, and to
breed cattle, manure the fields, and plant timber.

It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey
Ivanovitch, of his sister, of the peasants who came to him for
advice and were accustomed to do so--as impossible as to fling
down a child one is carrying in one's arms.  It was necessary to
look after the comfort of his sister-in-law and her children, and
of his wife and baby, and it was impossible not to spend with
them at least a short time each day.

And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping,
filled up the whole of Levin's life, which had no meaning at all
for him, when he began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in
just the same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more
important than the rest.

He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire
men under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current
rate of wages, was what he must not do, even though it was very
profitable.  Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity
of provender was what he might do, even though he felt sorry for
them; but the tavern and the pothouse must be put down, though
they were a source of income.  Felling timber must be punished as
severely as possible, but he could not exact forfeits for cattle
being driven onto his fields; and though it annoyed the keeper
and made the peasants not afraid to graze their cattle on his
land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.

To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender 10 per cent. a month, he
must lend a sum of money to set him free.  But he could not let
off peasants who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into
arrears.  It was impossible to overlook the bailiff's not having
mown the meadows and letting the hay spoil; and it was equally
impossible to mow those acres where a young copse had been
planted.  It was impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home
in the busy season because his father was dying, however sorry he
might feel for him, and he must subtract from his pay those
costly months of idleness.  But it was impossible not to allow
monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for
anything.

Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his
wife, who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting
for three hours to see him could wait a little longer.  He knew
too that, regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a
swarm, he must forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see
to the bees alone, while he talked to the peasants who had come
after him to the bee-house.

Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and
far from trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all
thought or talk about it.

Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing
what he ought to do and what he ought not.  When he did not
think, but simply lived, he was continually aware of the presence
of an infallible judge in his soul, determining which of two
possible courses of action was the better and which was the
worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once
aware of it.

So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing
what he was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack
of knowledge to such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and
yet firmly laying down his own individual definite path in life.



Chapter 11


The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of
Levin's most painful days.  It was the very busiest working time,
when all the peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of
self-sacrifice in labor, such as is never shown in any other
conditions of life, and would be highly esteemed if the men who
showed these qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if
it were not repeated every year, and if the results of this
intense labor were not so simple.

To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the
meadows, turn over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the
winter corn--all this seems so simple and ordinary; but to
succeed in getting through it all everyone in the village, from
the old man to the young child, must toil incessantly for three
or four weeks, three times as hard as usual, living on rye-beer,
onions, and black bread, thrashing and carrying the sheaves at
night, and not giving more than two or three hours in the
twenty-four to sleep.  And every year this is done all over
Russia.

Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in
the closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in
this busy time that he was infected by this general quickening of
energy in the people.

In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye,
and to the oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and
returning home at the time his wife and sister-in-law were
getting up, he drank coffee with them and walked to the farm,
where a new thrashing machine was to be set working to get ready
the seed-corn.

He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the
leaves of the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled
aspen beams of the new thatch roof.  He gazed through the open
door in which the dry bitter dust of the thrashing whirled and
played, at the grass of the thrashing floor in the sunlight and
the fresh straw that had been brought in from the barn, then at
the speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flew chirping in
under the roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the
crevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the
dark, dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.

"Why is it all being done?" he thought.  "Why am I standing here,
making them work?  What are they all so busy for, trying to show
their zeal before me?  What is that old Matrona, my old friend,
toiling for?  (I doctored her, when the beam fell on her in the
fire)" he thought, looking at a thin old woman who was raking up
the grain, moving painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet
over the uneven, rough floor.  "Then she recovered, but today or
tomorrow or in ten years she won't; they'll bury her, and
nothing will be left either of her or of that smart girl in the
red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action shakes the ears
out of their husks.  They'll bury her and this piebald horse, and
very soon too," he thought, gazing at the heavily moving, panting
horse that kept walking up the wheel that turned under him.  "And
they will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard
full of chaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulders--they
will bury him.  He's untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and
shouting to the women, and quickly setting straight the strap on
the moving wheel.  And what's more, it's not them alone--me
they'll bury too, and nothing will be left.  What for?"

He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to
reckon how much they thrashed in an hour.  He wanted to know this
so as to judge by it the task to set for the day.

"It'll soon be one, and they're only beginning the third sheaf,"
thought Levin.  He went up to the man that was feeding the
machine, and shouting over the roar of the machine he told him to
put it in more slowly.  "You put in too much at a time, Fyodor.
Do you see--it gets choked, that's why it isn't getting on.  Do
it evenly."

Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted
something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did
not want him to.

Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began
feeding the corn in himself.  Working on till the peasants'
dinner hour, which was not long in coming, he went out of the
barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with him, stopping beside a
neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the thrashing floor for seed.

Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which
Levin had once allotted land to his cooperative association.  Now
it had been let to a former house porter.

Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon,
a well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same
village, would not take the land for the coming year.

"It's a high rent; it wouldn't pay Platon, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch," answered the peasant, picking the ears off his
sweat-drenched shirt.

"But how does Kirillov make it pay?"

"Mituh!" (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of
contempt), "you may be sure he'll make it pay, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch!  He'll get his share, however he has to squeeze to
get it!  He's no mercy on a Christian.  But Uncle Fokanitch" (so
he called the old peasant Platon), "do you suppose he'd flay the
skin off a man?  Where there's debt, he'll let anyone off.  And
he'll not wring the last penny out.  He's a man too."

"But why will he let anyone off?"

"Oh, well, of course, folks are different.  One man lives for his
own wants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling
his belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous man.  He lives for his
soul.  He does not forget God."

"How thinks of God?  How does he live for his soul?" Levin almost
shouted.

"Why, to be sure, in truth, in God's way.  Folks are different.
Take you now, you wouldn't wrong a man...."

"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, and
turning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards
home.  At the peasant's words that Fokanitch lived for his soul,
in truth, in God's way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to
burst out as though they had been locked up, and all striving
towards one goal, they thronged whirling through his head,
blinding him with their light.



Chapter 12


Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his
thoughts (he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual
condition, unlike anything he had experienced before.

The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an
electric shock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single
whole the whole swarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts
that incessantly occupied his mind.  These thoughts had
unconsciously been in his mind even when he was talking about the
land.

He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested
this new thing, not yet knowing what it was.

"Not living for his own wants, but for God?  For what God?  And
could one say anything more senseless than what he said?  He said
that one must not live for one's own wants, that is, that one
must not live for what we understand, what we are attracted by,
what we desire, but must live for something incomprehensible, for
God, whom no one can understand nor even define.  What of it?
Didn't I understand those senseless words of Fyodor's?  And
understanding them, did I doubt of their truth?  Did I think them
stupid, obscure, inexact?  No, I understood him, and exactly as
he understands the words.  I understood them more fully and
clearly than I understand anything in life, and never in my life
have I doubted nor can I doubt about it.  And not only I, but
everyone, the whole world understands nothing fully but this, and
about this only they have no doubt and are always agreed.

"And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a
miracle which would convince me.  A material miracle would have
persuaded me.  And here is a miracle, the sole miracle possible,
continually existing, surrounding me on all sides, and I never
noticed it!

"Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly.  That's
comprehensible and rational.  All of us as rational beings can't
do anything else but live for our belly.  And all of a sudden the
same Fyodor says that one mustn't live for one's belly, but must
live for truth, for God, and at a hint I understand him!  And I
and millions of men, men who lived ages ago and men living now--
peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned, who have thought
and written about it, in their obscure words saying the same
thing--we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live
for and what is good.  I and all men have only one firm,
incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be
explained by the reason--it is outside it, and has no causes and
can have no effects.

"If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a
reward, it is not goodness either.  So goodness is outside the
chain of cause and effect.

"And yet I know it, and we all know it.

"What could be a greater miracle than that?

"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be
over?" thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing
the heat nor his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief
from prolonged suffering.  This feeling was so delicious that it
seemed to him incredible.  He was breathless with emotion and
incapable of going farther; he turned off the road into the
forest and lay down in the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass.
He took his hat off his hot head and lay propped on his elbow in
the lush, feathery, woodland grass.

"Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand," he thought,
looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and
following the movements of a green beetle, advancing along a
blade of couch-grass and lifting up in its progress a leaf of
goat-weed.  "What have I discovered?" he asked himself, bending
aside the leaf of goat-weed out of the beetle's way and twisting
another blade of grass above for the beetle to cross over onto
it.  "What is it makes me glad?  What have I discovered?

"I have discovered nothing.  I have only found out what I knew.
I understand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too
gives me life.  I have been set free from falsity, I have found
the Master.

"Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this
grass and of this beetle (there, she didn't care for the grass,
she's opened her wings and flown away), there was going on a
transformation of matter in accordance with physical, chemical,
and physiological laws.  And in all of us, as well as in the
aspens and the clouds and the misty patches, there was a process
of evolution.  Evolution from what? into what?--Eternal evolution
and struggle....  As though there could be any sort of tendency
and struggle in the eternal!  And I was astonished that in spite
of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could not
discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and
yearnings.  Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: 'To
live for God, for my soul.'  And this meaning, in spite of its
clearness, is mysterious and marvelous.  Such, indeed, is the
meaning of everything existing.  Yes, pride," he said to himself,
turning over on his stomach and beginning to tie a noose of
blades of grass, trying not to break them.

"And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect.
And most of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of
intellect.  The cheating knavishness of intellect, that's it," he
said to himself.

And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his
ideas during the last two years, the beginning of which was the
clear confronting of death at the sight of his dear brother
hopelessly ill.

Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and
himself too, there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and
forgetfulness, he had made up his mind that life was impossible
like that, and that he must either interpret life so that it
would not present itself to him as the evil jest of some devil,
or shoot himself.

But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and
feeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many
joys and had been happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning
of his life.

What did this mean?  It meant that he had been living rightly,
but thinking wrongly.

He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual
truths that he had sucked in with his mother's milk, but he had
thought, not merely without recognition of these truths, but
studiously ignoring them.

Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the
beliefs in which he had been brought up.

"What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if
I had not had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live
for God and not for my own desires?  I should have robbed and
lied and killed.  Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my
life would have existed for me."  And with the utmost stretch of
imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature he would
have been himself, if he had not known what he was living for.

"I looked for an answer to my question.  And thought could not
give an answer to my question--it is incommensurable with my
question.  The answer has been given me by life itself, in my
knowledge of what is right and what is wrong.  And that knowledge
I did not arrive at in any way, it was given to me as to all
men, _given_, because I could not have got it from anywhere.

"Where could I have got it?  By reason could I have arrived at
knowing that I must love my neighbor and not oppress him?  I was
told that in my childhood, and I believed it gladly, for they
told me what was already in my soul.  But who discovered it?  Not
reason.  Reason discovered the struggle for existence, and the
law that requires us to oppress all who hinder the satisfaction
of our desires.  That is the deduction of reason.  But loving
one's neighbor reason could never discover, because it's
irrational."



Chapter 13


And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between
Dolly and her children.  The children, left to themselves, had
begun cooking raspberries over the candles and squirting milk
into each other's mouths with a syringe.  Their mother, catching
them at these pranks, began reminding them in Levin's presence of
the trouble their mischief gave to the grown-up people, and that
this trouble was all for their sake, and that if they smashed the
cups they would have nothing to drink their tea out of, and that
if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing to eat, and die
of hunger.

And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with
which the children heard what their mother said to them.  They
were simply annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted,
and did not believe a word of what their mother was saying.  They
could not believe it indeed, for they could not take in the
immensity of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not
conceive that what they were destroying was the very thing they
lived by.

"That all comes of itself," they thought, "and there's nothing
interesting or important about it because it has always been so,
and always will be so.  And it's all always the same.  We've no
need to think about that, it's all ready.  But we want to invent
something of our own, and new.  So we thought of putting
raspberries in a cup, and cooking them over a candle, and
squirting milk straight into each other's mouths.  That's fun,
and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking out of
cups."

"Isn't it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the
aid of reason for the significance of the forces of nature and
the meaning of the life of man?" he thought.

"And don't all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by
the path of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to
bring him to a knowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows
so certainly that he could not live at all without it?  Isn't it
distinctly to be seen in the development of each philosopher's
theory, that he knows what is the chief significance of life
beforehand, just as positively as the peasant Fyodor, and not a
bit more clearly than he, and is simply trying by a dubious
intellectual path to come back to what everyone knows?

"Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone
and make their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on.
Would they be naughty then?  Why, they'd die of hunger!  Well,
then, leave us with our passions and thoughts, without any idea
of the one God, of the Creator, or without any idea of what is
right, without any idea of moral evil.

"Just try and build up anything without those ideas!

"We only try to destroy them, because we're spiritually provided
for.  Exactly like the children!

"Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant,
that alone gives peace to my soul?  Whence did I get it?

"Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life
filled with the spiritual blessings Christianity has given me,
full of them, and living on those blessings, like the children I
did not understand them, and destroy, that is try to destroy,
what I live by.  And as soon as an important moment of life
comes, like the children when they are cold and hungry, I turn to
Him, and even less than the children when their mother scolds
them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my childish
efforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.

"Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to
me, revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the
chief thing taught by the church.

"The church! the church!" Levin repeated to himself.  He turned
over on the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing
into the distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.

"But can I believe in all the church teaches?" he thought, trying
himself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his
present peace of mind.  Intentionally he recalled all those
doctrines of the church which had always seemed most strange and
had always been a stumbling block to him.

"The Creation?  But how did I explain existence?  By existence?
By nothing?  The devil and sin.  But how do I explain evil?...
The atonement?...

"But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has
been told to me and all men."

And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith
of the church which could destroy the chief thing--faith in God,
in goodness, as the one goal of man's destiny.

Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith
in the service of truth instead of one's desires.  And each
doctrine did not simply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine
seemed essential to complete that great miracle, continually
manifest upon earth, that made it possible for each man and
millions of different sorts of men, wise men and imbeciles, old
men and children--all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty, beggars and
kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and to build up
thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, and
which alone is precious to us.

Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky.
"Do I not know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a
round arch?  But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight,
I cannot see it not round and not bounded, and in spite of my
knowing about infinite space, I am incontestably right when I see
a solid blue dome, and more right than when I strain my eyes to
see beyond it."

Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to
mysterious voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly
within him.

"Can this be faith?" he thought, afraid to believe in his
happiness.  "My God, I thank Thee!" he said, gulping down his
sobs, and with both hands brushing away the tears that filled his
eyes.



Chapter 14


Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught
sight of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman,
who, driving up to the herd, said something to the herdsman.
Then he heard the rattle of the wheels and the snort of the sleek
horse close by him.  But he was so buried in his thoughts that he
did not even wonder why the coachman had come for him.

He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to
him and shouted to him.  "The mistress sent me.  Your brother has
come, and some gentleman with him."

Levin got into the trap and took the reins.  As though just
roused out of sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his
faculties.  He stared at the sleek horse flecked with lather
between his haunches and on his neck, where the harness rubbed,
stared at Ivan the coachman sitting beside him, and remembered
that he was expecting his brother, thought that his wife was most
likely uneasy at his long absence, and tried to guess who was the
visitor who had come with his brother.  And his brother and his
wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite different from
before.  He fancied that now his relations with all men would be
different.

"With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there
always used to be between us, there will be no disputes; with
Kitty there shall never be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever he
may be, I will be friendly and nice; with the servants, with
Ivan, it will all be different."

Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted
with impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked
round at Ivan sitting beside him, not knowing what to do with his
unoccupied hand, continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed
out, and he tried to find something to start a conversation about
with him.  He would have said that Ivan had pulled the
saddle-girth up too high, but that was like blame, and he longed
for friendly, warm talk.  Nothing else occurred to him.

"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said the
coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.

"Please don't touch and don't teach me!" said Levin, angered by
this interference.  Now, as always, interference made him angry,
and he felt sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his
supposition that his spiritual condition could immediately change
him in contact with reality.

He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and
Tanya running to meet him.

"Uncle Kostya! mamma's coming, and grandfather, and Sergey
Ivanovitch, and someone else," they said, clambering up into the
trap.

