collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
ï»¿Project Gutenberg's The Making of the New Testament, by Benjamin W. Bacon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Making of the New Testament

Author: Benjamin W. Bacon

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39288]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ***




Produced by David Edwards, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT


  THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE

  Editors of THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE

  Rt. Hon. H. A. L. Fisher, M.A., F.B.A.
  Prof. Gilbert Murray, Litt.D., LL.D., F.B.A.
  Prof. J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., LL.D.


  _For list of volumes in the Library see end of book._

  THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

  _By_ BENJAMIN W. BACON D.D.

  PROFESSOR OF NEW CRITICISM AND EXEGESIS IN YALE UNIVERSITY

  [Illustration]

  THORNTON BUTTERWORTH LIMITED 15 BEDFORD STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

_First Impression September 1912 - All Rights Reserved_

MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




CONTENTS


  PART I

  CANONIZATION AND CRITICISM

   CHAP.                                                       PAGE

      I INSPIRATION AND CANONIZATION                              7

     II THE REACTION TO CRITICISM                                33


    PART II

    THE LITERATURE OF THE APOSTLE

    III PAUL AS MISSIONARY AND DEFENDER OF THE GOSPEL OF GRACE   56

     IV PAUL AS PRISONER AND CHURCH FATHER                       83

      V PSEUDO-APOSTOLIC EPISTLES                               104


    PART III

    THE LITERATURE OF CATECHIST AND PROPHET

     VI THE MATTHÃAN TRADITION OF THE PRECEPTS OF JESUS         128

    VII THE PETRINE TRADITION. EVANGELIC STORY                  154

   VIII THE JOHANNINE TRADITION. PROPHECY                       185


   PART IV

   THE LITERATURE OF THE THEOLOGIAN

     IX THE SPIRITUAL GOSPEL AND EPISTLES                       206

      X EPILOGUES AND CONCLUSIONS                               233

        BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            251

        INDEX                                                   255




THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT

PART I


CANONIZATION AND CRITICISM

CHAPTER I

INSPIRATION AND CANONIZATION


The New Testament presents the paradox of a literature born of protest
against the tyranny of a canon, yet ultimately canonized itself through
an increasing demand for external authority. This paradox is full of
significance. We must examine it more closely.

The work of Jesus was a consistent effort to set religion free from the
deadening system of the scribes. He was conscious of a direct, divine
authority. The broken lights of former inspiration are lost in the full
dawn of God's presence to His soul.

So with Paul. The key to Paul's thought is his revolt against legalism.
It had been part of his servitude to persecute the sect which claimed to
know another Way besides the "way"[1] of the scribes. These Christians
signalized their faith by the rite of baptism, and gloried in the sense
of endowment with "the Spirit." Saul was profoundly conscious of the
yoke; only he had not drammed that his own deliverance could come from
such a quarter. But contact with victims of the type of Stephen, men
"filled with the Spirit," conscious of the very "power from God" for
lack of which his soul was fainting, could not but have some effect. It
came suddenly, overwhelmingly. The real issue, as Saul saw it, both
before and after his conversion, was Law _versus_ Grace. In seeking
"justification" by favour of Jesus these Christians were opening a new
and living way to acceptance with God. Traitorous and apostate as the
attempt must seem while the way of the Law still gave promise of
success, to souls sinking like Saul's deeper and deeper into the
despairing consciousness of "the weakness of the flesh" forgiveness in
the name of Jesus might prove to be light and life from God. The
despised sect of 'sinners' whom he had been persecuting expressed the
essence of their faith in the doctrine that the gift of the Spirit of
Jesus had made them sons and heirs of God. If the converted Paul in turn
is uplifted--"energized," as he terms it--even beyond his
fellow-Christians, by the sense of present inspiration, it is no more
than we should expect.

    Footnote 1: _Tarik_, i. e. "way," is still the Arabic term for a
    sect, and the Rabbinic term for legal requirement is _halacha_, i.
    e. "walk."

Paul's conversion to the new faith--or at least his persistent
satisfaction in it--will be inexplicable unless we appreciate the logic
of his recognition in it of an inherent opposition to the growing
demands of legalism. Jesus had, in truth, led a revolt against mere
book-religion. His chief opponents were the scribes, the devotees and
exponents of a sacred scripture, the Law. "Law" and "Prophets," the one
prescribing the conditions of the expected transcendental Kingdom, the
other illustrating their application and guaranteeing their promise,
constituted the canon of the synagogue. Judaism had become a religion of
written authority. Jesus set over against this a direct relation to the
living Father in heaven, ever presently revealed to the filial spirit.
The Sermon on the Mount makes the doing of this Father's will something
quite other than servitude to written precepts interpreted by official
authority and imposed under penalty. It is to be self-discipline in the
Father's spirit of disinterested goodness, as revealed in everyday
experience.

Even the reward of this self-discipline, the Kingdom, Jesus did not
conceive quite as the scribes. To them obedience in this world procured
a "share in the world to come." To Him the reward was more a matter of
being than of getting. The Kingdom was an heir-apparency; and,
therefore, present as well as future. It was "within" and "among" men as
well as before them. They should seek to "be sons and daughters of the
Highest," taking for granted that all other good things would be
"added." So Jesus made religion live again. It became spiritual, inward,
personal, actual.

After John the Baptist's ministry to what we should call the
'unchurched' masses, Jesus took up their cause. He became the "friend"
and champion of the "little ones," the "publicans and sinners," the
mixed 'people of the land' in populous, half-heathen, Galilee. The
burdens imposed by the scribes in the name of 'Scripture' were accepted
with alacrity by the typical Pharisee unaffected by Pauline misgivings
of 'moral inability.' To "fulfil all righteousness" was to the Pharisee
untainted by Hellenism a pride and delight. To the "lost sheep of
Israel" whom Jesus addressed, remote from temple and synagogue, this
"righteousness" had proved (equally as to Paul, though on very different
grounds) "a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear."
Jesus "had compassion on the multitude." To them he "spoke with
authority"; and yet "not as the scribes" but as "a prophet." When
challenged by the scribes for his authority he referred to "the baptism
of John," and asked whether John's commission was "from heaven, or of
men." They admitted that John was "a prophet." Those who give utterance
after this manner to the simple, sincere conviction of the soul, voicing
its instinctive aspiration toward "the things that be of God," are
conscious that they speak not of themselves.

Jesus, it is true, was no iconoclast. He took pains to make clear that
if he superseded what they of old time had taught as righteousness, it
was in the interest of a higher, a "righteousness of God." If he
disregarded fasts and sabbaths, it was to put substance for form, end
for means. "Judgment, mercy, and good faith" should count more than
tithes from "mint and anise and cummin." He echoed what John the Baptist
had taught of repentance and forgiveness. Hope should no longer be based
on birth, or prerogative, or ritual form, but on the mercy of a God who
demands that we forgive if we would be forgiven. Such had been, however,
the message not of John only, but of all the prophets before him: "I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice." Jesus taught this higher, inward,
righteousness; but not merely as John had done. John had said: Repent,
for the wrath of God is at hand. Jesus said: Repent, for the forgiveness
of God is open. The Father's heart yearns over the wayward sons. Jesus
preached the nearness of the Kingdom as "glad tidings to the poor"; and
among these "poor" were included even aliens who put "faith" in the God
of Abraham.

The new Way started from the same Scripture as that of the scribes, but
it tended in an opposite direction. Theirs had been gradually developing
in definiteness and authority since the time of Ezra; yes, since Josiah
had made formal covenant, after the discovery of "the book of the Law"
in the temple, pledging himself and his people to obedience. As with
many ancient peoples, the codification of the ancient law had been
followed by its canonization, and as the national life had waned the
religious significance of the Law had increased. It was now declared to
express the complete will of God, for an ideal people of God, in a
renovated universe, whose centre was to be a new and glorified
Jerusalem. The Exile interrupted for a time the process of formal
development; but in the ecclesiastical reconstruction which followed in
Ezra's time "the book of the Law" had become all the more supreme; the
scribe took the place of the civil officer, the synagogue became local
sanctuary and court-house in one, the nation became a church, Israel
became 'the people of the book.'

Legal requirement calls for the incentive of reward. We need not wonder,
then, that the canon of the Law was soon supplemented by that of the
writings of the Prophets, historical and hortatory. The former were
considered to interpret the Law by showing its application in practice,
the latter were valued for their predictive element. Law and Prophets
were supplemented by Psalms, and elements from the later literature
having application to the religious system. The most influential were
the "apocalypses," or "revelations" of the transcendental Kingdom and of
the conditions and mode of its coming. Scripture had thus become an
embodiment of Israel's religion. It set forth the national law, civil,
criminal, or religious; and the national hope, the Kingdom of God. Its
custodian and interpreter was the 'scribe,' lawyer and cleric in one.
The scribe held "the key of knowledge"; to him it was given to 'bind and
loose,' 'open and shut.' Any preacher who presumed to prescribe a
righteousness apart from 'the yoke of the Law,' or to promise
forgiveness of sins on other authority, must reckon with the scribes. He
would be regarded as seeking to 'take the Kingdom by violence.'

Jesus' martyrdom was effected through the priests, the temple
authorities; but at the instigation of the scribes and Pharisees. His
adherents were soon after driven out from orthodox Judaism and subjected
to persecution. This persecution, however, soon found its natural
leadership, not among the Sadducean temple-priesthood, but among the
devotees of the Law. It was "in the synagogues." From having been
quasi-political it became distinctly religious. This persecution by the
Pharisees is on the whole less surprising than the fact that so many of
the Jewish believers should have continued to regard themselves as
consistent Pharisees, and even been so regarded by their fellow-Jews. In
reality Jewish Christians as a rule could see no incompatibility between
average synagogue religion and their acceptance of Jesus as the man
supernaturally attested in the resurrection as destined to return
bringing the glory of the Kingdom. Jesus' idea of 'righteousness' did
not seem to them irreconcilable with the legalism of the scribes; still
less had they felt the subtle difference between his promise "Ye shall
be sons and daughters of the Highest" and the apocalyptic dreams which
they shared with their fellow-Jews. Saul the persecutor and Paul the
apostle were more logical. In Gal. ii. 15-21 we have Paul's own
statement of the essential issue as it still appeared to his clear mind.
Average synagogue religion still left room for a more fatherly relation
of God to the individual, in spite of the gradual encroachment of the
legalistic system of the scribes. Men not sensitive to inconsistency
could find room within the synagogue for the 'paternal theism' of Jesus,
even if this must more and more be placed under the head of
'uncovenanted mercies.' To Paul, however, the dilemma is absolute. One
must trust either to "law" or "grace." Partial reliance on the one is to
just that extent negation of faith in the other. The system of written
precept permits no exception, tolerates no divided allegiance. If the
canon of written law be the God-given condition of the messianic
promise, then no man can aspire to share in the hope of Israel who does
not submit unreservedly to its yoke. Conversely, faith is not faith if
one seek to supplement it by the merit of "works of law."

From this point of view the Jew who seeks forgiveness of sins by baptism
"into the name of Jesus" must be considered an apostate from the Law. He
acknowledges thereby that he is following another Way, a way of "grace,"
a short-cut, as it were, to a share in Israel's messianic inheritance by
the "favour" of a pretended Messiah. The same Paul who after his
conversion maintains (Gal. ii. 21) that to seek "justification" through
the Law makes the grace of God of none effect, must conversely have held
before conversion that to seek it by "grace" of Jesus made the Law of
none effect. Even at the time of writing the axiom still held: No
resistance to the yoke of the Law, no persecution (Gal. v. 11).

It is true, then, that the legalistic system of prescription and reward
had developed--could develop--only at the expense of the less
mechanical, more fatherly, religion of a Hosea or an Isaiah. Even
scribes had admitted that the law of love was "much more than all whole
burnt-offering and sacrifice." And the movement of the Baptist and of
Jesus had really been of the nature of a reaction toward this older,
simpler faith. The sudden revolt in Paul's own mind against the scribal
system might not have occurred in the mind of a Pharisee unfamiliar with
Greek ideas. But to some extent Paul's experience of the conflict of
flesh and spirit, a 'moral inability' to meet the Law's demands _was_ a
typical Christian experience, as Paul felt it to be. To him it became
the basis of an independent gospel. To him the Cross and the Spirit
imparted from the risen Messiah were tokens from God that the
dispensation of Law is ended and a dispensation of Grace and Son ship
begun. Without this Pauline gospel _about_ Jesus Christianity could
never have become more than a sect of reformed Judaism.

The teaching and martyrdom of Jesus had thus served to bring out a deep
and real antithesis. Only, men who had not passed like Paul from the
extreme of trust in legalism to a corresponding extremity of despair
might be pardoned for some insensibility to this inconsistency. We can
appreciate that James and Peter might honestly hold themselves still
under obligation of the written law, even while we admit Paul's logic
that any man who had once "sought to be justified in Christ" could not
turn back in any degree to legal observance without being
"self-condemned."

Christianity may be said to have attained self-consciousness as a new
religion in the great argument directed by Paul along the lines of his
own gospel against Peter and the older apostles. Its victory as a
universal religion of 'grace' over the limitations of Judaism was due to
the common doctrine of 'the Spirit.' This was the one point of
agreement, the one hope of ultimate concord among the contending
parties. All were agreed that endowment with 'the Spirit' marks the
Christian. It was in truth the great inheritance from Jesus shared by
all in common. And Peter and James admitted that to deny that
uncircumcized Gentiles had received the Spirit was to "contend against
God."

After Paul's death ecclesiastical development took mostly the road of
the synagogue. The sense of the presence and authority of 'the Spirit'
grew weaker, the authority of the letter stronger. From the outset even
the Pauline churches, in ritual, order, observance, had followed
instinctively this pattern. All continued, as a matter of course, to use
the synagogue's sacred writings. Paul himself, spite of his protest
against "the letter," could make no headway against his opponents, save
by argument from 'Scripture.' He had found in it anticipations and
predictions of his own Christian faith; but by an exegesis often only
little less forced and fantastic than that of the rabbinic schools in
which he had been trained. This was a necessity of the times. The
reasoning, fallacious as it seems to-day, had appealed to and
strengthened Paul's own faith, and was probably effective with others,
even if the faith really rested on other grounds than the reasoning by
which it was defended. The results of this biblicism were not all
salutary. The claims of written authority were loosened rather than
broken. Paul himself had found room enough within these defences for the
religion of the Spirit; but a generation was coming with less of the
sense of present inspiration. Dependence on past authority would be
increased in this new generation in direct proportion to its sense of
the superior 'inspiration' of the generation which had gone before. Paul
is unhampered by even "the scriptures of the prophets" because in his
view these take all their authority and meaning from "the Lord, the
Spirit." Hence "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." Only
the remembered "word of the Lord" has authority for Paul beyond his own,
even when he thinks that he also has the Spirit. With that exception
past revelation is for Paul subordinate to present. But Paul's immediate
disciple, the author of Hebrews, is already on a lower plane. This
writer looks back to a threefold source of authority: God had spoken in
former ages "by the prophets" and to the present "by a Son," but he
looks also to an apostolic authority higher than his own: The word "was
confirmed unto us by them that heard, God also bearing witness with
them, both by signs and wonders, and by manifold powers, and by gifts
of the Holy Ghost." Similarly the author of the Pastoral Epistles
(90-100?) holds the "pattern of sound words" heard from Paul as a
"sacred deposit," which is "guarded," rather than revealed, "by the Holy
Spirit." The "sound words" in question are defined to be "the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ." These, taken together with "the doctrine which
is according to godliness," fix the standard of orthodoxy. To "Jude"
(100-110?) the faith is something "once for all delivered to the
saints." His message is: "Remember, beloved, the words spoken before by
the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ." Authority increases, the sense
of the revealing Spirit decreases.

It is long before the sense of present inspiration, both in word and
work is lost; still longer before the recorded precepts of Jesus, the
exhortations and directions of apostles, the visions of "prophets," come
to take their place alongside the Bible of the synagogue as "writings of
the new covenant." Melito of Sardis (_c._ 170) is the first to use this
expression, and even in his case it does not bear the sense of a canon
with definite limits. Tertullian (200-210) is the first to place a
definite "New Testament" over against the Old. We must glance at some of
the intermediate steps to appreciate this gradual process of
canonization.

At first there is no other 'Scripture' than the synagogue's. Clement of
Rome (95) still uses only the Law and the Prophets (including certain
apocrypha now lost) as his Bible. He refers to the precepts of Jesus
(quoted as in Acts XX. 35 from oral tradition), with the same sense as
Paul of their paramount authority, and bids the Corinthians whom he
addresses give heed to what the blessed Apostle Paul had written to them
"in the beginning of the gospel service," to warn them against
factiousness. Nor has Clement yet lost the sense of direct inspiration;
for he attaches to his own epistle, written in behalf of the church at
Rome, the same superhuman authority claimed in Acts XV. 28 for the
letter sent by the church at Jerusalem. If the Corinthians disregard the
"words spoken by God through us" they will "incur no slight
transgression and danger," for these warnings of a sister church are
uttered in the name and by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Still, Clement
does not dream of comparing his authority, even when he writes as agent
of the church, with that of "the oracles of the teaching of God," the
"sacred Scriptures," the "Scriptures which are true, which were given
through the Holy Ghost, wherein is written nothing unrighteous or
counterfeit." He does not even rank his own authority with that of "the
good apostles, Peter and Paul."

Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, transported to Rome for martyrdom in
110-117, employs a brief stay among the churches of Asia to exhort them
to resist the encroachments of heresy by consolidation of church
organization, discipline, strict obedience to the bishop. Ignatius, too,
still feels the afflatus. His message, he declares with emphasis, was
revealed to him, together with the occasion for it, directly from
heaven. It was "the voice of God and not only of a man" when he cried
out among the Philadelphians: "Give heed to the bishop, and the
presbytery and deacons." Yet Ignatius cannot enjoin the Romans as Peter
and Paul did. They were "apostles." He is "a convict." His inspiration,
however undoubted, is of a lower order.

Hermas, a 'prophet' of the same Roman church as Clement, though a
generation later, is still so conscious of the superhuman character of
his "Visions," "Parables," and "Mandates" that he gives them out for
circulation as inspired messages of the Spirit; and this not for Rome
alone. Clement, then apparently still living, and "the one to whom this
duty is committed," is to send them "to foreign cities." In point of
fact the _Shepherd_ of Hermas long held a place for many churches as
part of the New Testament canon. Yet less than a generation after
Hermas, the claim to exercise the gift of prophecy in the church was
looked upon as dangerous if not heretical.

In the nature of the case it was really impossible that the original
sense of endowment with "the Spirit" should survive. Not only did the
rapidly growing reverence for the apostles and the Lord open a chasm
separating "the word of wisdom and the word of power" given to that age,
from the slighter contemporary claims of miracle and revelation; the
very growth and wide dissemination of the gospel message made
standardization imperative. Before the middle of the second century
Gnostic schism had swept nearly half the church into the vortex of
speculative heresy. Marcion at Rome (_c._ 140) carried Pauline
anti-legalism to the extreme of an entire rejection of the Old
Testament. Judaism and all its works and ways were to be repudiated. The
very God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was declared other than, and
ignorant of, the "heavenly Father" of Jesus. Against such vagaries there
must be some historic standard. Even Marcion himself looked to the past,
however recent, as the source of light, and since some written standard
must be found, it was he, the heretic, who gave to Christianity its
first canon of Christian writings. The Marcionite churches did away with
the public reading of the Law and the Prophets, and could only put in
their place "Gospel" and "Apostle." Not that Epistles, Gospels, and even
'Revelations' were not also in use among the orthodox; but they are not
yet referred to as 'Scripture.' Even gospels are treated merely as aids
to the memory in transmitting the teaching of the Lord. This teaching
itself is but the authoritative interpretation of Law and Prophets, and
is in turn interpreted by the writings of the apostles.

Marcion's 'Gospel' consisted of our Luke, expurgated according to his
own ideas. His 'Apostle' contained the Epistles of Paul minus the
Pastoral Epistles and a series of passages cancelled out from the rest
as Jewish interpolations. This was the first Christian Bible distinct
from 'the Scriptures' of the synagogue.

Indirectly the growth of Gnostic heresy contributed still more to the
increasing authority of apostolic and quasi-apostolic writings. One of
its earliest and most obnoxious forms was called 'Doketism,' from its
exaggeration of Paulinism into a complete repudiation of the historic
Jesus, whose earthly career was stigmatized as mere 'phantasm'
(_dokesis_). Doketism is known to us not only through description by
orthodox opponents, but by a few writings of its own. It is the type of
heresy antagonized in the Johannine Epistles (_c._ 100) and in those of
Ignatius (110-117). Now Ignatius, as we have seen, relied mainly on
church organization and discipline. The Pastoral Epistles (90-100),
while they emphasize also "the form of healthful words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus" take, on the whole, a similar direction. But 1st
John, which relies far less than the Pastoral Epistles or Ignatius on
mere church organization, is also driven back upon the life and teaching
of Jesus as the historic standard. It _does_, therefore, make formal
appeal to the sacred tradition in both its elements, but with a
difference characteristic of the Pauline spirit. The redeeming life and
death of Jesus are viewed as a manifestation of "the life, even the
eternal life (of the Logos) which was with the Father and was manifested
unto us" (the historic body of believers). Again Jesus' one "new
commandment," the law of love, is the epitome of all righteousness.

In his doctrine of Scripture as in many other respects the Johannine
writer shows a breadth and catholicity of mind which almost anticipates
the development of later ages. His task was in fact the adjustment of
the developed Pauline gospel to a type of Christianity more nearly akin
to synagogue tradition. This type had grown up under the name of Peter.
On the question of the standard of written authority 'John'[2] leaves
room for the freedom of the Spirit so splendidly set forth in the
teaching and example of Jesus and Paul, while he resists the erratic
licence of "those that would lead you astray." The result is a doctrine
of historic authority in general, and of that of the Scriptures in
particular, sharply differentiated from the Jewish, and deserving in
every respect to be treated as the basis of the Christian. In a great
chapter of his Gospel (John v.), wherein Jesus debates with the scribes
the question of His own authority, the dialogue closes with a
denunciation of them because they search the Scriptures with the idea
that in them they have eternal life, that is, they treat them as a code
of precepts, obedience to which will be thus rewarded. On the contrary,
says Jesus, the Scriptures only "bear witness" to the life that is
present in Himself as the incarnate, eternal, Word; "but ye will not
come unto me that ye might have life."

    Footnote 2: In using traditional names and titles such as "Luke,"
    "John," "Matthew," "James," no assumption is made as to
    authenticity. The designation is employed for convenience
    irrespective of its critical accuracy or inaccuracy.

In seeking the life behind the literature as the real revelation, the
Johannine writer makes the essential distinction between Jewish and
Christian doctrine. He stands between Paul, whose peculiar view was
based on an exceptional personal experience, and the modern
investigator, who can but treat all literary monuments and records of
religious movements objectively, as data for the history and psychology
of religion. If the student be devoutly minded the Scriptures will be to
him, too, however conditioned by the idiosyncrasies of temporal
environment and individual character, manifestations of "the life, even
the eternal life, which was with the Father and was manifested unto us."

But the Johannine writer was far deeper and more 'spiritual'[3] than the
trend of his age. Ignatius' friend and contemporary, Polycarp, "the
father of the Christians" of Asia, in his Epistle to the Philippians
(110-117) urges avoidance of the false teachers who "pervert the sayings
of the Lord to their own lusts, denying the (bodily) resurrection and
judgment." But he has no better remedy than to "turn (probably in a
somewhat mechanical way) to the tradition handed down from the
beginning" and to study "the Epistles of Paul." The former process is in
full application in Polycarp's later colleague, Papias of Hierapolis
(_c._ 145?), who publishes a little volume entitled _Interpretation of
the Sayings of the Lord_. It is based on carefully authenticated
traditions of the 'apostles and elders,' especially a certain
contemporary "Elder John" who speaks for the Jerusalem succession.
According to Papias our two Greek Gospels of Matthew and Mark represent
two apostolic sources, the one an Aramaic compilation of the Precepts of
Jesus by Matthew, the other anecdotes of his "sayings and doings"
collated from the preaching of Peter.

    Footnote 3: The Fourth Gospel is thus characterized by Clement of
    Alexandria, meaning that it had a deep symbolic sense.

Grateful as we must be for Papias' efforts to authenticate evangelic
tradition, since they are corroborated in their main results by all
other ancient tradition as well as by critical study of the documents,
it is noticeable how they stand in line with the tendencies of the age.
Eusebius (325) characterizes the reign of Trajan (98-117) as a period
when many undertook to disseminate in writing "the divine Gospels." One
of our own evangelists, whose work must probably be referred to the
beginning of this period, but is not mentioned by 'the Elder,' alludes
to the same phenomenon. The apostles were gone. Hence to Luke[4] the
question of "order" was a perplexity, as the Elder observes that it had
already been to Mark. Soon after Luke and Papias comes Basilides with
his _Exegetics_, probably based on Luke (120?), and Marcion (140), both
engaged from their own point of view with the current questions of
Jesus' teaching and ministry.

    Footnote 4: See Footnote 3 above.

Thus, at the beginning of the second century, the elements necessary to
the formation of a New Testament canon were all at hand. They included
the tradition of the teaching and work of Jesus, the letters of apostles
and church leaders revered as given by authority of the Spirit and the
visions and revelations of 'prophets.' Not only the elements were
present, the irresistible pressure of the times was certain to force
them into crystallization. The wonder is not that the canon should have
been formed, but that it should have been delayed so long.

For there were also resistant factors. Phrygia, the scene of Paul's
first great missionary conquests, the immemorial home of religious
enthusiasm, became the seat, about the middle of the second century, of
a movement of protest against the church policy of consolidation and
standardization. Montanus arose to maintain the persistence in the
church of the gift of prophecy, tracing the succession in both the male
and female line back to Silas the companion of Paul and the prophesying
daughters of Philip the Evangelist. The 'Phrygians,' as they were
called, naturally made much of the writings current in Asia Minor,
especially the book of 'prophecy' attributed to 'John.' Theoretically
indeed the church was unwilling to acknowledge the disappearance of this
gift. To Hermas (130-140) and the _Teaching of the Twelve_ (120-130) it
is still a "sin against the Spirit" to interrupt or oppose a prophet
during his ecstatic utterance. On the other hand, the _Teaching_
reiterates the apostolic warnings to "try the spirits," with
prohibitions of specific excesses of the order. Moreover by the time of
Montanus and the 'Phrygians' theoretical recognition of revelation
through the prophets was rapidly giving way before the practical dangers
inseparable from 'revelations' of this enthusiastic character, of which
any member of the church, man or woman, ignorant or learned, lay or
cleric, might be the recipient. The strict regulative control imposed by
both Paul and John[5] upon this type of spiritual gift (1st Thess. v. 20
f.; 1st Cor. xii. 3; xv. 29 f. 32; _cf._ 1st John iv. 1) was found
to be doubly necessary in face of the disintegrating tendencies of the
post-apostolic age, and after long debate and much protest the movement
of Montanus was at last decreed heretical at Rome, though IrenÃ¦us (186)
interceded for it, and Tertullian (210) became a convert.

    Footnote 5: See Footnote 3 above.

The history of this movement in the formative period of the New
Testament canon explains why the "revelations of the prophets" obtained
but scant recognition as compared with the "word of the Lord" and the
"commandment of the apostles." Last of the three, in order of rank (1st
Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11), last also to be codified in written form, we
need not be surprised that our present New Testament retains but a
single one of the once current books of 'prophecy.' For a time the
_Shepherd_ of Hermas and the _Apocalypse of Peter_ rivalled the claims
to canonicity of our own Revelation of John, but were soon dropped. Our
own Apocalypse has suffered more opposition than any other New Testament
writing, being still excluded from the canon in some branches of the
church. Its precarious place at the end of the canon which we moderns
have inherited from Athanasius (_ob._ 373) was due, in fact, far less to
its author's vigorous assertions of authority as an inspired "prophet"
(i. 1-3; xxii. 6-9, 18 f.) than to the claims to apostolicity put
forward in the preface and appendix. For until the third century no one
drammed of understanding the "John" of Rev. i. 4, 9 and xxii. 8
otherwise than as the Apostle. Eusebius accordingly (325) is uncertain
only as to whether the book should be classed in his first group of
"accepted" writings, along with the Gospels and Pauline Epistles, or in
the third as "spurious." If written by "some other John than the
Apostle" he would not even honour it with a place in his second group of
"disputed" books, along with Hebrews, James, Jude, and 2nd Peter.

Thus at the end of the second century, while there was still much
dispute (destined indeed to continue for centuries) as to the _limits_
of the New Testament canon, there had in fact come to be a real
canonical New Testament set over against the Old, as of equal, or even
greater authority. The "word of the Lord," the "commandment of the
apostles," and at last even the "revelations of the prophets," had
successively ceased as living realities, and become crystallized into
written form. They had been codified and canonized. The church had
travelled the beaten track of the synagogue, and all the more rapidly
from the example set before it. None of the early canons (_i. e._ lists
of writings permitted to be read in the churches) coincides exactly, it
is true, with the New Testament current among ourselves. The list of
Athanasius is the first to give just our books. The Roman list of the
Muratorian fragment (185-200) omits Hebrews, James and 2nd Peter, and
gives at least a partial sanction to the _Apocalypse of Peter_. The
lists of Origen (_ob._ 251) and Eusebius (325) vary as respects both
inclusion and exclusion. All early authorities express a doubtful
judgment regarding the outer fringe of minor writings such as James,
Jude, 2nd Peter, 2nd and 3rd John. Even those of larger content, such as
Hebrews and Revelation, if their apostolicity was questioned, remained
subjects of dispute. But already by A.D. 200 the time had long since
passed when any of the thirteen epistles bearing the name of Paul could
be deemed open to question. Marcion's exclusion of the three Pastorals
had been forgotten. Dispute of the four-gospel canon could still be
tolerated; but not for long. IrenÃ¦us (186) has no patience with "those
wretched men" who cannot see that in the nature of the case there should
be neither more nor less than this number. But he explicitly refers to
those who disputed "that aspect of the gospel which is called John's."
There were, in fact, opponents of Montanism at Rome, who under the lead
of Gaius had denied the authenticity of all the writings attributed to
John, including the Gospel itself. But even those of the orthodox who
were willing enough to reject Revelation, with its now unfashionable
eschatology, agreed that Gaius' attack upon the fourth Gospel was too
radical. The small body who continued for a few generations to resist
the inclusion of any of the Johannine writings in the canon remained
without influence, and were ultimately forgotten. The 'catholic'[6]
church had repudiated heresy, standardized the faith, and confined its
recognized historic expression to a 'canon' of New Testament Scripture.

    Footnote 6: Catholic is here used in its etymological sense of
    "general" or universal. We shall have occasion to apply the term in
    a more limited sense hereafter.




CHAPTER II

THE REACTION TO CRITICISM


The consolidated 'catholic' church of the third century might seem, so
far as its doctrine of Scripture was concerned, to have retraced its
steps to a standpoint corresponding completely to that of the synagogue.
Only, the paradox still held that the very writings canonized were those
supremely adapted to evoke a spirit of resistance to the despotism of
either priest or scribe. The Protestant Reformation was a revolt against
the former, and it is noticeable how large a part was played by the New
Testament doctrine of the 'Spirit' in this struggle of spiritual
democracy against hierocratic tyranny. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians
became Luther's Palladium.

But the post-Reformation dogmatists took fright at their own freedom.
The prediction of the Romanists that repudiation of traditional
authority in its ecclesiastical embodiment would result in internecine
schism and conflict seemed on the point of being realized. The
theological system-makers, like their predecessors of the post-apostolic
age, could see no way out but to throw all their weight on a past
inspiration assumed to be without error. The canonical books were
declared to furnish an infallible rule of faith and practice.

It was in the sincere desire to meet the requirements of this theory
that the science of criticism grew up. In the earlier days it did not
venture for the most part beyond what is known as 'textual' criticism.
For a doctrine of inerrancy is manifestly unserviceable until errors of
transmission have been eliminated. Textual criticism set itself to this
task, asking the question: As between the various readings found in
different New Testament manuscripts, which is original? Unfortunately,
to meet the logical requirement the critic, if not backed like those of
Rome by a papal guarantee, must himself be infallible. The inevitable
result of this attempt, begun in the sincerest spirit of apologetics,
was to prove that an infallible text is hopelessly unattainable. Textual
criticism is indispensable; but as the servant of apologetics it is
foredoomed to failure.

The variation of the manuscripts was not the only obstacle to biblical
infallibility. To say nothing of differences of interpretation there was
the question of the canon. Either the decision of the 'catholic' church
must be accepted as infallible, or scholarship must undertake a
'criticism of the canon' to defend the current list of "inspired" books.
A 'higher' criticism became necessary if only to vindicate the church's
choice on historical grounds. Roman Catholics like Simon, whose
_Critical History_ of the Biblical books appeared in 1689-1695, could
reopen the question with impunity. Those who based their authority on
the infallibility of Scripture alone could not meet the challenge
otherwise than as MichÃ¦lis did in his _Introduction to the Divine
Writings of the New Testament_ (1750-1780). MichÃ¦lis undertook a
historical inquiry into the circumstances of origin of each of the
canonical books, with the object of proving each to be in reality what
tradition declared. The twenty-seven commonly accepted were supposed to
have been either written by apostles, or at least so super-intended and
guaranteed by them, as to cover all with the Ã¦gis of an infallibility
not conceded to the post-apostolic age. Scholarship in the harness of
apologetics again found its task impracticable. MichÃ¦lis himself
confessed it "difficult" to prove authenticity in cases like that of the
Epistle of Jude. Conceive the task as the scientific vindication of a
verdict rendered centuries before on unknown grounds, but now deprived
of official authority, and it becomes inevitably hopeless. Can it be
expected that doctors will not disagree on the authenticity or
pseudonymity of 2nd Peter, who always have disagreed on this and similar
questions, and have just admitted failure to agree in the matter of
text?

For half a century criticism seemed lost in the slough of mere
controversy over the (assumed) infallible text, and the (assumed)
infallible canon. Apologists fought merely on the defensive,
endeavouring to prove that men whose fallibility was admitted had
nevertheless pronounced an infallible verdict on the most difficult
subjects of literary and historical inquiry. Critics had an easy task in
showing that the church's theory of inspiration and canonicity was
incorrect; but made no progress toward a constructive explanation of the
religious, or even the historical, significance of the literature. Real
progress was made only when criticism left off the attempt either to
establish or disestablish a 'received' text, or an 'authorized' canon,
and became simply an instrument in the hand of the historian, as he
seeks to trace to their origins the ideas the church enshrined in her
literature because she found them effective in her growth.

For the great awakening in which New Testament criticism 'found itself'
as a genuine and indispensable branch of the history of religion, we are
largely indebted to the eminent church historian, Ferdinand Christian
Baur (_ob._ 1860). Baur gathered up the fragmentary results of a
generation of mere negation, a war of independence against the tyranny
of dogmatic tradition, and sought to place the New Testament writings in
their true setting of primitive church history. His particular views
have been superseded. Subsequent study has disproved many of his
inferences, and brought from friend and foe far-reaching modifications
to his general theory. But, consciously or not, Baur, in making
criticism the hand-maid of history, was working in the interest of that
constructive, Christian, doctrine of inspired Scripture which an ancient
and nameless teacher of the church had described as "witness" to the
Life, "even the eternal life, which was with the Father," and is in man,
and has been manifested in the origin and historical development of our
religion.

The Reformation had been a revolt against the despotism of the priest;
this was a revolt against the despotism of the scribe.

Baur gave scant--too scant--consideration to early tradition, making his
results unduly negative. None of the New Testament books are dated; few
besides the Pauline Epistles embody even an author's name; and these
few, 1st and 2nd Peter, James, Jude and Revelation, were (1st Peter
alone excepted) just those which even the canon-makers had classified as
doubtful, or spurious. Not even a Calvin would support the authenticity
of 2nd Peter, a Luther had denied the value of James and Revelation. It
had been an easy task for 'criticism of the canon' to show that those
who determined its content had not been actuated by considerations of
pure science. Those books secured admission which were most widely
current as ancient and trustworthy, and whose orthodoxy met the
standards of the time. Those were disputed, or rejected, which were less
widely current, or unorthodox, or could establish no direct relation to
an apostle. It was proper for the critic, once his aim had become not
apologetic but historical, to drop once for all the question whether the
canon-makers' selection--made not for scientific, but for religious
purposes--is good, bad or indifferent. The time had come for him to
apply the available evidence to his own scientific question: What
relation do these several writings bear to the development of
Christianity? It remained to be seen whether he could offer constructive
evidence more convincing than tradition.

The latest date to which an undated, or disputed, writing can be
assigned is that when the marks of its employment by others, or
influence upon them, become undeniable. This is termed the 'external'
evidence. The earliest date, conversely, is that to which we are brought
down by references in the book itself to antecedent and current events,
and writings, or by undeniable marks of their influence. This is termed
the 'internal' evidence. Counting tradition as part of the external
evidence, modern scientific criticism is able to fix within a few
decades the origin of all the New Testament writings, without incurring
opposition even from the apologist. No scholar now dreams of adopting
any other method of proof, whatever his doctrinal proclivities. The
overwhelming majority are agreed that the period covered, from the
earliest Pauline Epistles to the latest brief fulminations against
Gnostic Doketism and denial of 'resurrection and judgment,' is included
in the century from A.D. 50 to 150.

Baur's conception of the course of events in this momentous century has
been described as a theory of historical progress by fusion of opposites
in a higher unity. The Hegelian scheme of thesis, antithesis and
synthesis had in fact some justification in the recognized phenomena of
the development of Christianity. It had sprung from Judaism, overcoming
the particularism of that still nationalistic faith by the sense of its
mission to the world at large. The conflict acknowledged in all the
sources and most vividly reflected in the great Epistles of Paul to the
Galatians, Corinthians and Romans, a conflict between those who
conceived Christianity as a universal religion, and those who looked
upon it as only a reformed, spiritualized and perfected Judaism, was the
characteristic phenomenon of the first or apostolic age. It was the
struggle of the infant faith against its swaddling bands. The critical
historian is compelled to estimate all later, anonymous, accounts of
this development in the light of the confessedly earlier, and
indubitably authentic records, the four great Epistles of Paul; for
these simply reflect the actual conditions, and are not affected by the
later disposition to idealize the story. Thesis and antithesis were
therefore really in evidence at the beginnings.

Equal unanimity prevailed as to the close of the period in question. In
A.D. 150 to 200, Christianity was solidifying into the 'catholic'
church, rejecting extremes of doctrine on both sides, formulating its
'rule of faith,' determining its canon, centralizing administrative
control. It had thrown off as heretical upon the extreme left Marcion
and the Gnostics, who either repudiated the Jewish scriptures
altogether, or interpreted them with more than Pauline freedom. On the
extreme right it had renounced the unprogressive Ebionites of Palestine,
still unreconciled to Paul, and insistent on submission to the Law for
Jew and Gentile, as the condition of a 'share in the world to come.'
What could be imagined as to the course of events in the intervening
century of obscurity? Must it not have witnessed a progressive
divergence of the extremes of Paulinists and Judaizers, coincidently
with a rapprochement of the moderates from the side of Peter and that of
Paul respectively? Baur's outline seemed thus to describe adequately the
main course of events. He relied upon internal evidence to determine the
dates of the disputed writings and their relation to it. But 'criticism
of the canon' in Baur's own, and in the preceding generation, had come
to include among the writings of doubtful date and authenticity not only
those disputed in antiquity, and the anonymous narrative books, but also
1st Peter and the minor Epistles of Paul. Nothing strictly apostolic was
left save the four great Epistles of Paul.

The theory of Baur and the TÃ¼bingen school (for so his followers came to
be designated) was broadly conceived and ably advocated. In two vital
respects it has had permanent influence. (1) Criticism, as already
noted, has ceased to be mere debate about text and canon, and concerns
itself to-day primarily with the history of Christian ideas as embodied
in its primitive literature. Its problem is to relate the New Testament
writings, together with all other cognate material, to the history of
the developing religion from its earliest traceable form in the greater
Pauline Epistles to where it emerges into the full light of day toward
the close of the second century. (2) Again, Baur's outline of the
process through which the nascent faith attained to full
self-consciousness as a world-religion required correction rather than
disproof. It was a grievous mistake to identify Peter, James, and John
with those whom Paul bitterly denounces as Judaizing "false brethren,"
"super extra apostles," "ministers of Satan." It was a perversion of
internal evidence to reject as post-Pauline the Epistles of the later
period such as Philippians and Colossians, on the ground that Paul
himself did not live to participate in the second crisis, the defence of
his doctrine against perversion on the side of mystical, Hellenistic
theosophy. The great Epistles written under the name of Paul from the
period of his captivity are innocent of reference to the developed
Gnostic systems of the second century. They antagonize only an incipient
tendency in this direction.

But while the transition of A.D. 50-150 was both deeper and more complex
than Baur conceived, the transfer of the gospel during that century from
Jewish to Gentile soil is really the great outstanding fact, against
which as a background the literature must be read; and the initial stage
of the process is marked by the controversy of Paul with the Galilean
apostles. What we must call, in distinction from Paulinism, 'apostolic'
Christianity is well represented in the Book of Acts. Paul's writings
show that he felt himself and his churches to represent an independent
type of Christianity in all respects equal to the 'apostolic,' the
problem being unification of the two. Now it is axiomatic that the
investigator must proceed from the relatively known and determinable to
the unknown and disputable. Accordingly it is in reality from the
Epistolary literature of the church, in particular the greater Pauline
Epistles, that he must take his start. As a source for our understanding
of the development of the life of the church the Literature of the
Apostle, directly participant in the conflicts and issues of the times,
even if in its later elements of doubtful or pseudonymous authorship,
takes precedence as a whole over the Literature of the Catechist, with
its later and more or less idealized narration, exemplified in the Book
of Acts.

Modern criticism acknowledges, then, its indebtedness to the TÃ¼bingen
school for a clearer definition of both its task and method, by
concentrating attention upon the contrast between the Petrine and the
Pauline conception of 'the gospel.' Still it must be admitted that most
of the inferences first drawn have since been overthrown. In their
chronological scheme of the New Testament writings the TÃ¼bingen critics
under-estimated the force of the external evidences (including early
tradition) and misinterpreted the internal. New discovery and more
careful study of literary relations have inverted Baur's views as to
dates of the Johannine writings. Four of these (the Gospel and three
Epistles) are anonymous. Baur's date for these has been forced back by
no less than half a century. The fifth (Revelation) bears the name of
John, but was hotly disputed as pseudonymous in the second century, and
even by its supporters was dated so late as "the end of the reign of
Domitian" (95). The TÃ¼bingen school placed Revelation thirty years
earlier, and attributed it to the Apostle. Modern criticism emphatically
reverts to the ancient date, and regards the book as pseudonymous, or as
written by "some other John."

Again the relative dates of the Synoptic writings (Matthew, Mark,
Luke-Acts) were inverted by the TÃ¼bingen critics, primarily through
wrong application of their theory of doctrinal development; secondarily,
and as a consequence, through misinterpretation of the intricate
literary relationships. Present-day criticism considers it established
that Mark is the oldest of the three, taken up by each of the other two.
There is almost equal unanimity in regarding the discourse material
common to Matthew and Luke and variously combined by each with Mark, as
independently drawn by them from the book of the "Precepts of the Lord,"
reported by Papias to have been compiled by Matthew "in the Hebrew (_i.
e._ Aramaic) tongue." TÃ¼bingen gospel criticism is thus almost entirely
set aside, in favour of the so-called 'Two-document' theory.

So with the Pauline Epistles of the second period. Doubt still clings to
Ephesians. It had been treated by some as pseudo-Pauline even before the
time of Baur; but Baur's own followers soon receded from his extreme
application of his theory to the internal evidence of Philippians,
Colossians and Philemon. It became evident that Paul's "gospel"
included something more than the mere antithesis of Law and Grace. He
had other opponents than the Judaizers, and had to defend his doctrine
against perversion by Grecizing mystics as well as against opposition by
Pharisaic legalists.

Two generations of research and controversy have greatly advanced the
cause of constructive criticism. Hand in hand with a more accurate
dating of the literature, secured through more impartial judgment of
both the external and internal evidence, there has gone a reconstruction
of our conception of the course of events. The tendencies in the early
church were not two only, but four; corresponding, perhaps, to those
rebuked by Paul at Corinth, which called themselves by the names
respectively of Peter, of Paul, of Apollos and of Christ. It seems
probable from the bitterness with which in 2nd Cor. x. 7 Paul denounces
the man who says, "I am of Christ," that this party-cry was employed in
the sense of following the example of Jesus as respects obedience to the
Law (for even Paul acknowledged that Christ had been "made a minister of
the circumcision for the truth of God"). If so, the Corinthian
"Christ-party" may be identified with those "ministers of the
circumcision" who denied both the apostleship and the gospel of Paul. At
all events those "of Cephas" were relatively harmless. They may be
identified with the so-called 'weak' of Romans, for whose scruples on
the score of 'pollutions of idols' Paul demands such consideration both
at Corinth and at Rome. His own adherents both at Corinth (those 'of
Paul') and at Rome (the 'strong') are to follow his example not merely
in recognizing that: "No idol is anything in the world," that "there is
nothing unclean of itself," and that "all things are lawful." It is to
be followed also in recognizing the limitations of this liberty. Limits
are imposed among other things by the scruples of others, so that Paul
himself becomes "as under the Law" when among Jews, though "as without
the Law" among the Gentiles. The "weak" are to be resisted only when the
admission of themselves or their claims would lead to "doubtful
disputations," or to a rebuilding of walls of separation that had been
torn down through faith in Christ. Galatians sounds the battle-cry of
endangered liberty. Corinthians (and Romans in still higher degree)
shows the magnanimity of the victor.

Whether it be possible to identify those "of Apollos" at Corinth with
the beginnings of that Hellenistic perversion of the Pauline gospel into
a mystical theosophy which afterwards passed into Gnosticism may be left
an open question. At least we have come to see that the conditions of
the church's growth were far more complex than Baur imagined. In
particular it is necessary to distinguish four different attitudes on
the single question of the obligation of the Law. There were (1)
Judaizers who insisted on complete submission to the Law as the
condition of salvation, for both Jews and Gentiles; (2) imitators of
Cephas, who considered believers of Jewish birth to be "under the Law,"
but asked of Gentiles only such consideration for it as the special
conditions seemed to require; (3) Paulinists, who held that neither Jews
nor Gentiles are under the law, yet felt that consideration should be
shown for the scrupulous when asked not as of right, but as of charity;
(4) radicals, who recognized no limits to their freedom save the one new
commandment.

But while conflict first broke out over the mere concrete question of
Gentile liberty, the real distinction of Paul's gospel from that of the
older apostles was far deeper. The question as TÃ¼bingen critics
conceived it concerned primarily the _extent_ of the gospel message,--to
how large a circle was it offered? Modern criticism has come to see that
the difference was in higher degree a difference of _quality_. Paul's
whole message of redemption through the cross and resurrection started
from other premises than those of the Galilean apostles, and was
conceived in other terms. For this reason it leads over to a new
Christology. In short, the transition of Christianity from its Jewish to
its Gentile form is not a mere enlargement of its field by the abolition
of particularistic barriers. The background we must study for the
understanding of it is not so much mere contemporary history as the
contemporary history _of religion_. The development from the Petrine
gospel broadly characteristic of the Synoptic writings, through the
Pauline Epistles to that of the Johannine writings, is a transition from
Hebrew to Hellenistic conceptions of what redemption is, and how it is
effected. Modern criticism expresses the contrast in its distinction of
the gospel _of_ Jesus from the gospel _about_ Jesus.

In the case of both Paul and his predecessors in the faith there is a
common starting-point. It was the doctrine that God had raised Jesus
from the dead and exalted Him as Christ and Lord to the throne of glory.
Its proofs were the ecstatic phenomena of the Spirit, those strange
manifestations of 'prophecy,' 'tongues,' and the like in the Christian
assembly. The inference from this resurrection faith for an apostle of
the Galilean group was that he must "teach all men everywhere to observe
all things whatsoever Jesus had commanded." Jesus had been raised up in
Israel as the Prophet like unto Moses; His apostle must repeat the
remembered word of commandment and the word of promise. He will have an
authority derived from the manifestations of signs and wonders. These
had accompanied Jesus' own career, and now, by grace of His endowment of
His disciples with the Spirit, they will be repeated by their hands.
The 'apostolic' gospel is thus primarily historical. The Pauline gospel
centres at the other pole of religious conviction. It is primarily
psychological. For Paul the immediate effect of the revelation of God's
Son "in" him is an irresistible impulse to relate his own soul's
experience. The gospel he preaches is not so much what Jesus did or said
while on earth, as what God has done, and is still doing, through the
"life-giving Spirit" which emanates from the risen Lord. Signs and
wonders are tokens of the Spirit, but are of less value, and must vanish
before the "abiding" ethical gifts. Both the Pauline and the Petrine
gospel start from the common confession of "Jesus as Lord"; but the
Christology of the Synoptic literature is an Apotheosis doctrine,
falling back on the historical Jesus. That of the Epistles is a doctrine
of Incarnation, appealing to the eternal manifestation of God in man.
For the former, Jesus was "a prophet mighty in deed and word," raised up
by God in accordance with the promise of Deut. xviii. 18, to turn Israel
to repentance. Having fulfilled this mission in rejection and martyrdom
Jesus had been exalted to God's "right hand" and "made both Lord and
Christ." He there awaits the subjection of all His enemies. In the
Pauline gospel the story of Jesus is a drama of the supernal regions,
wherein His earthly career as prophet, leader, teacher, sinks to the
level of the merest episode. As pre-existent spirit, Jesus had been
from the beginning of the creation "in the form of God." As the period
of its consummation drew near He took upon Him human form, descended
through suffering and death to the lowest depths of the underworld, and
by divine power had reascended above all the heavens with their ranks of
angelic hierarchies. Whether Paul himself so conceived it or not, the
Gentile world had no other moulds of thought wherein to formulate such a
Christology than the current myths of Redeemer-gods. The value of the
individual _soul_ had at last been discovered, and men resorted to the
ancient personifications of the forces of nature as deliverers of this
new-found _soul_ from its weakness and mortality. The influential
religions of the time were those of personal redemption by mystic union
with a dying and resurrected "Saviour-god," an Osiris, an Adonis, an
Attis, a Mithra. Religions of this type were everywhere displacing the
old national faiths. The Gentile could not think of "the Christ"
primarily as a Son of David who restores the kingdom to Israel, shatters
the Gentiles like a potter's vessel and rules them with a rod of iron.
If he employed this Old Testament language at all, it had for him a
purely symbolical sense. The whole conception was spiritualized. The
"enemies" overcome were the spiritual foes of humanity, sin and death;
"redemption" was not the deliverance of Israel out of the hand of all
their enemies, that (together with all afar off that call upon the name
of this merciful God) they may "serve Him in holiness and righteousness
all their days." It was the rescue of the sons of Adam out of the
bondage to evil Powers incurred through inheritance of Adam's sinful
flesh. This had been the tendency already of Jewish apocalypse. The
starting-point of Paul's own conceptions was not Israel's bondage in
Egypt, but a conception already tinged, like the late book of Jewish
philosophy called the Wisdom of Solomon, with the Stoic conception of
'flesh' as prison-house of 'spirit,' already inflamed, like the
contemporary Jewish apocalypses of Esdras and Baruch, with lurid visions
of a universe rescued by superhuman power from a thraldom of demonic
rule. Paul's preaching was made real by his own experience. For if ever
there was an evangelist whose message was his own experience, Paul was
such. And Paul's experience was not so much that of a Palestinian Jew,
as that of a Hellenist, one whose whole idea of 'redemption' has been
unconsciously universalized, individualized, and spiritualized, by
contact with Greek and Hellenistic thought. Paul and the Galilean
apostles were not far apart in their expectations of the future. Both
stood gazing up into heaven. But for his authority Paul inevitably
looked inwards, the Galilean apostles looked backwards.

It is hopeless at the present stage of acquaintance with the history of
religion, particularly the spread of the various 'mysteries' and
religions of personal redemption in the early empire, to deny this
contrast between the gospel of Paul and the gospel of "the apostles and
elders at Jerusalem." It is shortsighted to overlook its significance in
the transition of the faith. Whereas the Jewish-Christian had as its
principal background the national history, more or less
transcendentalized in the forms of apocalypse, Paul's had as its
principal background the speculative mythology of the Hellenistic world,
more or less adapted to the forms of Judaism. Only ignorance of the
function of mythology, especially as then employed to express the
aspiration of the soul for purity, life and fellowship with God, can
make these mythologically framed religious ideas seem an inappropriate
vehicle to convey Paul's sense of the significance of Jesus' message and
life of "Son ship." They were at least the best expression those times
and that environment could afford of the greater Kingdom God had
proclaimed in the resurrection of the Christ, and was bringing to pass
through the outpouring of His Spirit.

Modern criticism must therefore recognize that the beginnings of our
religion were not a mere enlargement of Judaism by abolition of the
barriers of the Law, but a fusion of the two great streams of religious
thought distinctive of the Jewish and the Hellenistic world in a higher
unity. Alexander's hoped-for "marriage of Europe and Asia" was
consummated at last in the field of religion itself. Denationalized
Judaism contributed the social ideal: the messianic hope of a world-wide
Kingdom of God. It is the worthy contribution of a highly ethical
national religion. Hellenism contributed the individual ideal: personal
redemption in mystic union with the life of God. It is a concept derived
from the Greek's newly-awakened consciousness of a personality agonizing
for deliverance out of the bondage of the material and transitory, alien
and degrading to its proper life. The critic who has become a historian
of ideas will find his study of the literature of the apostolic and
post-apostolic age here widening out into a prospect of unsuspected
largeness and significance. He will see as the two great divisions of
his subject, (1) the gospel _of_ Jesus, represented, as we are told, in
the first beginnings of literary development by an Aramaic compilation
of the Precepts of the Lord by the Apostle Matthew, circulating possibly
even before the great Pauline Epistles among the Palestinian churches;
(2) the gospel _about_ Jesus, represented in the Pauline Epistles, and
these based on their author's personal experience. It is a gospel of
God's action "in Christ, reconciling the world." It interprets the
personality of Jesus and his experience of the cross and resurrection
as manifestations of the divine idea. The interpretation employs
Hellenistically coloured forms of thought, and is forced to vindicate
itself first against subjection to legalism, afterwards against
perversion into an unethical, superstitious theosophy. But surely the
doctrine _about_ Jesus, interpreting the significance of His person and
work as the culmination of redemption through the indwelling of God in
men and among men belongs as much to the essence of Christianity as the
gospel of love and faith proclaimed _by_ Jesus.

Besides these two principal types of gospel and their subordinate
combinations the critical historian may see ultimately emerging a type
of 'spiritual' gospel, growing upon Gentile soil, in fact, receiving its
first literary expression in the early years of the second century at
the very headquarters of the Pauline mission-field. This third type aims
to be comprehensive of the other two. It is essentially a gospel about
Jesus, though it takes the form for its main literary expression of a
gospel preached by Jesus. The fourth evangelist is the true successor of
Paul, though the conditions of the age compel him to go beyond the
literary form of the Epistle and to construct a Gospel wherein both
factors of the sacred tradition shall appear, the words and works, the
Precepts and the Saving Ministry of Jesus. But it is in no mechanical or
slavish sense that the fourth evangelist appeals to this supreme
authority. He lifts the whole message above the level of mere baptized
legalism, even while he guards it against the unbridled licence of
Gnostic theosophy, applying to this purpose his doctrine of the
Incarnate Logos. His basis is psychology as well as history. It is the
Life which is the light of men, that life whose source is God, and which
permeates and redeems His creation; even "the eternal Life which was
with the Father and was manifested to us."

In the critical grouping of our New Testament writings the Gospel and
Epistles of John can occupy, then, no lesser place than that of the
keystone of the arch.

To sum up: the Literature of the Apostle owed its early development and
long continuance among the Pauline churches of Asia Minor and Greece, to
the impetus and example of Paul's apostolic authority. The Literature of
the Teacher and Prophet, growing up around Jerusalem and its daughter
churches at Antioch and Rome, came slowly to surpass in influence the
"commandment of the apostles," as the church became more and more
exclusively dependent upon it for the "teaching of the Lord." It was the
function of the great "theologian" of Ephesus (as he came early to be
called), linking the authority of both, to furnish the fundamental basis
for the catholic faith.


