you began by displeasing him, and I came after you."

"It was very good of you," she said. Her face was not gay now. "Does
Lord Audley live there--when he is at home?"

"No one lives there," he explained soberly. "No one has lived there
for three generations. It's a ruin--I was going to say, a nightmare.
The greater part of the house was burnt down in a carouse held to
celebrate the accession of George the Third. The Audley of that day
rebuilt it on a great scale, but before it was finished he gave a
housewarming, at which his only son quarrelled with a guest. The two
fought at daybreak, and the son was killed beside the old Butterfly in
the Yew Walk--you will see the spot some day. The father sent away the
builders and never looked up again. He diverted much of his property,
and a cousin came into the remainder and the title, but the house was
never finished, the windows in the new part were never glazed. In the
old part some furniture and tapestry decay; in the new are only bats
and dust and owls. So it has stood for eighty years, vacant in the
midst of neglected gardens. In the sunlight it is one of the most
dreary things you can imagine. By moonlight it is better, but
unspeakably melancholy."

"How dreadful," she said in a low voice. "I almost wish, Mr. Basset,
that you had not told me. They say in France that if you see the dead
without touching them, you dream of them. I feel like that about the
house."

It crossed his mind that she was talking for effect. "It is only a
house after all," he said.

"But our house," with a touch of pride. Then, "What are those?"
she asked, pointing to the gray shapeless beasts, time-worn and
weather-stained, that flanked the entrance to the courtyard.

"They are, or once were, Butterflies, the badge of the Audleys. These
hold shields. You will see the Butterflies in many places in the
Gatehouse. You will find them with men's faces and sometimes with a
fret on the wings. Your uncle says that they are not butterflies, but
moths, that have eaten the Audley fortunes."

It was a thought that matched the picture he had drawn of the deserted
house, and Mary felt that the morning had lost its brightness. But not
for long. Basset led her into a room on the right of the hall, and the
sight drew from her a cry of pleasure. On three sides the dark
wainscot rose eight feet from the floor; above, the walls were
whitewashed to the ceiling and broken by dim portraits, on stretchers
and without frames. On the fourth side where the panelling divided the
room from a serving-room, once part of it, it rose to the ceiling. The
stone hearth, the iron dogs, the matted floor, the heavy chairs and
oak table, all were dark and plain and increased the austerity of the
room.

At the end of the table places were laid for three, and Toft, who had
set on the breakfast, was fixing the kettle amid the burning logs.

"Is Mr. Audley coming down?" Basset asked.

"He bade me lay for him," Toft replied dryly. "I doubt if he will
come. You had better begin, sir. The young lady," with a searching
look at her, "must want her breakfast."

"I am afraid I do," Mary confessed.

"Yes, we will begin," Basset said. He invited her to make the tea.

When they were seated, "You like the room?"

"I love it," she answered.

"So do I," he rejoined, more soberly. "The panelling is linen--pattern
of the fifteenth century--you see the folds? It was saved from the old
house. I am glad you like it."

"I love it," she said again. But after that she grew thoughtful, and
during the rest of the meal she said little. She was thinking of what
was before her; of the unknown uncle, whose bread she was eating, and
upon whom she was going to be dependent. What would he be like? How
would he receive her? And why was every one so reticent about him--so
reticent that he was beginning to be something of an ogre to her? When
Toft presently appeared and said that Mr. Audley was in the library
and would see her when she was ready, she lost color. But she answered
the man with self-possession, asked quietly where the library was, and
had not Basset's eyes been on her face he would have had no notion
that she was troubled.

As it was, he waited for her to avow her misgiving--he was prepared to
encourage her. But she said nothing.

None the less, at the last moment, with her hand on the door of the
library, she hesitated. It was not so much fear of the unknown
relative whom she was going to see that drove the blood from her
cheek, as the knowledge that for her everything depended upon him. Her
new home, its peace, its age, its woodland surroundings, fascinated
her. It promised her not only content, but happiness. But as her stay
in it hung upon John Audley's will, so her pleasure in it, and her
enjoyment of it, depended upon the relations between them. What would
they be? How would he receive her? What would he be like? At last she
called up her courage, turned the handle, and entered the library.

For a moment she saw no one. The great room, with its distances and
its harmonious litter, appeared to be empty. Then, "Mary, my dear,"
said a pleasant voice, "welcome to the Gatehouse!" And John Audley
rose from his seat at a distant table and came towards her.

The notion which she had formed of him vanished in a twinkling, and
with it her fears. She saw before her an elderly gentleman, plump
and kindly, who walked with a short tripping step, and wore the
swallow-tailed coat with gilt buttons which the frock-coat had
displaced. He took her hand with a smile, kissed her on the forehead,
and led her to a chair placed beside his own. He sat for a moment
holding her hand and looking at her.

"Yes, I see the likeness," he said, after a moment's contemplation.
"But, my dear, how is this? There are tears in your eyes, and you
tremble."

"I think," she said, "I was a little afraid of you, sir."

"Well, you are not afraid now," he replied cheerfully. "And you won't
be again. You won't be again. My dear, welcome once more to the
Gatehouse. I hope that it may be your home until another is offered
you. Things came between your father and me--I shall never mention
them again, and don't you, my dear!"--this a little hurriedly--"don't
you; all that is buried now, and I must make it up to you. Your
letters?" he continued, patting her hand. "Yes, Peter told me that you
wrote to me. I need not say that I never had them. No, never had
them--Toft, what is it?"

The change in his voice struck her. The servant had come in quietly.
"Mr. Basset, sir, has lost----"

"Another time!" John Audley replied curtly. "Another time! I am
engaged now. Go!" Then when the door had closed behind the servant,
"No, my dear," he continued, "I need not say that I never had them, so
that I first heard of your troubles through a channel upon which I
will not dwell. However, many good things come by bad ways, Mary. I
hope you like the Gatehouse?"

"It is charming!" she cried with enthusiasm.

"It has only one drawback," he said.

She was clever enough to understand that he referred to its owner, and
to escape from the subject. "This room," she said, "is perfection. I
have never seen anything like it, sir."

"It is a pleasant room," he said, looking round him. "There is our
coat over the mantel, gules, a fret or; like all old coats, very
simple. Some think it is the Lacy Knot; the Audley of Edward the
First's time married a Lacy. But we bore our old coat of three
Butterflies later than that, for before the fall of Roger Mortimer,
who was hung at Tyburn, he married his daughter to an Audley, and the
escheaters found the wedding chamber in his house furnished with our
Butterflies. Later the Butterfly survived as our badge. You see it
there!" he continued, pointing it out among the mouldings of the
ceiling. "There is the Stafford Knot, the badge of the great Dukes of
Buckingham, the noblest of English families; it is said that the last
of the line, a cobbler, died at Newport, not twenty miles from here.
We intermarried with them, and through them with Peter's people, the
Bassets. That is the Lovel Wolf, and there is the White Wolf of the
Mortimers--all badges. But you do not know, I suppose, what a badge
is?"

"I am afraid not," she said, smiling. "But I am as proud of our
Butterfly, and as proud to be an Audley, sir, as if I knew more."

"Peter must give you some lessons in heraldry," he answered. "We live
in the past here, my dear, and we must indoctrinate you with a love of
our pursuits or you will be dull." He paused to consider. "I am afraid
that we cannot allot you a drawing-room, but you must make your room
upstairs as comfortable as you can. Etruria will see to that. And
Peter shall arrange a table for you in the south bay here, and it
shall be your table and your bay. That is his table; this is mine. We
are orderly, and so we do not get in one another's way."

She thanked him gratefully, and with tears in her eyes, she said
something to which he would not listen--he only patted her hand--as to
his kindness, his great kindness, in receiving her. She could not,
indeed, put her relief into words, so deep was it. Nowhere, she felt,
could life be more peaceful or more calm than in this room which no
sounds of the outer world except the songs of birds, no sights save
the swaying of branches disturbed; where the blazoned panes cast their
azure and argent on lines of russet books, where an aged hound
sprawled before the embers, and the measured tick of the clock alone
vied with the scratching of the pen. She saw herself seated there
during drowsy summer days, or when firelight cheered the winter
evenings. She saw herself sewing beside the hearth while her
companions worked, each within his circle of light.

Then, she also was an Audley. She also had her share in the race which
had lived long on this spot. Already she was fired with the desire to
know more of them, and that flame John Audley was well fitted to fan.
For he was not of the school of dry-as-dust antiquaries. He had the
knack of choosing the picturesque in story, he could make it stand out
for others, he could impart life to the actors in it. And, anxious to
captivate Mary, he bent himself for nearly an hour to the display of
his knowledge. Taking for his text one or other of the objects about
him, he told her of great castles, from which England had been ruled,
and through which the choicest life of the country had passed, that
now were piles of sherds clothed with nettles. He told her of that
woodland country on the borders of three counties, where the papists
had long lived undisturbed and where the Gunpowder Plot had had its
centre. He told her of the fashion which came in with Richard the
Second, of adorning the clothes with initials, reading and writing
having become for the first time courtly accomplishments; and to
illustrate this he showed her the Westminster portrait of Richard in a
robe embroidered with letters of R. He quoted Chaucer:


              And thereon hung a broch of gold ful schene
              On which was first i-written a crowned A
              And after that, Amor vincit omnia.


Then, turning his back on her, he produced from some secret place a
key, and opening a masked cupboard in the wall, he held out for her
inspection a small bowl, bent and mis-shapen by use, and supported by
two fragile butterflies. The whole was of silver so thin that to
modern eyes it seemed trivial. Traces of gilding lingered about some
parts of it, and on each of the wings of the butterflies was a capital
A.

She was charmed. "Of all your illustrations," she cried, "I prefer
this one! It is very old, I suppose?"

"It is of the fifteenth century," he said, turning it about. "We
believe that it was made for the Audley who fell early in the Wars of
the Roses. Pages and knights, maids and matrons, gloves of silk and
gloves of mail, wrinkled palms and babies' fingers, the men, the
women, the children of twelve generations of our race, my dear, have
handled this. Once, according to an old inventory, there were six;
this one alone remains."

"It must be very rare?" she said, her eyes sparkling.

"It is very rare," he said, and he handled it as if he loved it. He
had not once allowed it to go out of his fingers. "Very rare. I doubt
if, apart from the City Companies, there is another in the hands of
the original owners."

"And it came to you by descent, sir?"

He paused in the act of returning it to its hiding-place. "Yes, that
is how it came to me," he said in a muffled tone. But he seemed to be
a long time putting it away; and when he turned with the key in his
hand his face was altered, and he looked at her--well, had she done
anything to anger him, she would have thought he was angry. "To whom
besides me could it descend!" he asked, his voice raised a tone. "But
there, I must not grow excited. I think--I think you had better go
now. Go, my dear, now. But come back presently."

Mary went. But the change in tone and face had been such as to startle
her and to dash the happy mood of a few moments earlier. She wondered
what she had said to annoy him.




                              CHAPTER IX

                              OLD THINGS


The Gatehouse, placed on the verge of the upland, was very solitary.
Cut off from the vale by an ascent which the coachmen of the great
deemed too rough for their horses, it was isolated on the other three
sides by Beaudelays Park and by the Great Chase, which flung its
barren moors over many miles of table-land. In the course of the
famous suit John Audley had added to the solitude of the house by a
smiling aloofness which gave no quarter to those who agreed with his
rival. The result was that when Mary came to live there, few young
people would have found the Gatehouse a lively abode.

But to Mary during the quiet weeks that followed her arrival it seemed
a paradise. She spent long hours in the open air, now seated on a
fallen trunk in some glade of the park, now watching the squirrels in
the clear gloom of the beech-wood, or again, lying at length on the
carpet of thyme and heather that clothed the moor. She came to know by
heart every path through the park--except that which led to the Great
House; she discovered where the foxgloves clustered, where the
meadow-sweet fringed the runlet, where the rare bog-bean warned the
traveller to look to his footing. Even the Great Chase she came to
know, and almost daily she walked to a point beyond the park whence
she could see the distant smoke of a mining village. That was the one
sign of life on the Chase; elsewhere it stretched vast and unpeopled,
sombre under a livid sky, smiling in sunshine, here purple with ling,
there scarred by fire--always wide under a wide heaven, raised high
above the common world. Now and again she met a shepherd or saw a gig,
lessened by distance, making its slow way along a moorland track. But
for days together she might wander there without seeing a human being.

The wide horizon became as dear to her as the greenwood. Pent as she
had been in cities, straitened in mean rooms where sight and smell had
alike been outraged, she revelled in this sweet and open life. The hum
of bees, the scent of pines, the flight of the ousel down the water,
the whistle of the curlew, all were to her pleasures as vivid as they
were new.

Meantime Basset made no attempt to share her excursions. He was
fighting a battle with himself, and he knew better than to go out of
his way to aid the enemy. And for her part she did not miss him. She
did not dislike him, but the interest he excited in her was feeble.
The thought of comparing him with Lord Audley, with the man to whose
intervention she owed this home, this peace, this content, never
occurred to her. Of Audley she did think as much perhaps as was
prudent, sometimes with pensive gratitude, more rarely with a smile
and a blush at her folly in dwelling on him. For always she thought of
him as one, high and remote, whom it was not probable that she would
ever see again, one whose course through life lay far from hers.

Presently, it is not to be denied, Basset began to grow upon her. He
was there. He was part of her life. Morning and evening she had to do
with him. Often she read or sewed in the same room with him, and in
many small ways he added to her comfort. Sometimes he suggested things
which would please her uncle; sometimes he warned her of things which
she would do well to avoid. Once or twice he diverted to himself a
spirt of John Audley's uncertain temper; and though Mary did not
always detect the man[oe]uvre, though she was far from suspecting the
extent of his vigilance or the care which he cast about her, it would
have been odd if she had not come to think more kindly of him, and to
see merits in him which had escaped her at first.

Meanwhile he thought of her with mingled feelings. At first with
doubt--it was never out of his mind that she had made much of Lord
Audley and little of him. Then with admiration which he withstood more
feebly as time went on, and the cloven hoof failed to appear. Later,
with tenderness, which, hating the scheme John Audley had formed, he
masked even from himself, and which he was sure that he would never
have the courage to express in her presence.

For Basset was conscious that, aspire as he might, he was not a hero.
The clash of life, the shock of battle, had no attraction for him. The
library at the Gatehouse was, he owned it frankly, his true sphere.
She, on the other hand, had had experiences. She had sailed through
unknown seas, she had led a life strange to him. She had seen much,
done much, suffered much, had held her own among strangers. Before her
calmness and self-possession he humbled himself. He veiled his head.

He did not attempt, therefore, to accompany her abroad, but at home he
had no choice save to see much of her. There was only one living room
for all, and she glided with surprising ease into the current of the
men's occupations. At first she was astray on the sea of books. Her
knowledge was not sufficient to supply chart or compass, and it fell
to Basset to point the way, to choose her reading, to set in a proper
light John Audley's vivid pictures of the past, to teach her the
elements of heraldry and genealogy. She proved, however, an apt
scholar, and very soon she dropped into the position of her uncle's
secretary. Sometimes she copied his notes, at other times he set her
on the track of a fact, a relationship, a quotation, and she would
spend hours in a corner, embedded in huge tomes of the county
histories. Dugdale, Leland, Hall, even Polydore Vergil, became her
friends. She pored over the Paston Letters, probed the false pedigrees
of Banks, and could soon work out for herself the famous discovery
respecting the last Lovel.

For a young girl it was an odd pursuit. But the past was in the
atmosphere of the house, it went with the fortunes of a race whose
importance lay in days long gone. Then all was new to her, enthusiasm
is easily caught, and Mary, eager to please her uncle, was glad to be
of use. She found the work restful after the suspense of the past
year. It sufficed for the present, and she asked no more.

She never forgot the lamplit evenings of that summer; the spacious
room, the fluttering of the moths that entered by the open windows,
the flop of the old dog as it sought a cooler spot, the whisper of
leaves turned ceaselessly in the pursuit of a fact or a fancy. In the
retrospect all became less a picture than a frame containing a past
world, a fifteenth-century world of color and movement, of rooms
stifled in hangings and tapestries, of lines of spear-points and rows
of knights in surcoats, of tolling bells and praying monks, of
travellers kneeling before wayside shrines, of strange changes of
fortune. For says the chronicler:


"I saw one of them, who was Duke of Exeter (but he concealed his name)
following the Duke of Burgundy's train barefoot and bare-legged,
begging his bread from door to door--this person was the next of the
House of Lancaster and had married King Edward's sister."


And of dark sayings:


"Thys sayde Edward, Duke of Somerset, had herde a fantastyk prophecy
that he sholde dy under a Castelle, wherefore he, as meche as in him
was, he lete the King that he sholde not come in the Castelle of
Wynsore, dredynge the sayde prophecy; but at Seint Albonys there was
an hostelry havyng the sygne of a Castelle, and before that hostelry
he was slayne."


"His badge was a Portcullis," her uncle said, when she read this to
him, "so it was natural that he should fall before a castle. He used
the Beanstalk, too, and if his name had been John, a pretty thing
might have been raised upon it. But you're divagating, my dear," he
continued, smiling--and seldom had Mary seen him in a better
humor--"you're divagating, whereas I--I believe that I have solved the
problem of the Feathers."

"The Prince of Wales's? No!"

"I believe so. Of course there is no truth in the story which traces
them to the blind King of Bohemia, killed at Crécy. His crest was two
vulture wings."

"But what of Arderne, who was the Prince's surgeon?" Basset objected.
"He says clearly that the Prince gained it from the King of Bohemia."

"Not at all!" John Audley replied arrogantly--at this moment he was an
antiquary and nothing more. "Where is the Arderne extract? Listen.
'Edward, son of Edward the King, used to wear such a feather, and
gained that feather from the King of Bohemia, whom he slew at Crécy,
and so assumed to himself that feather which is called an ostrich
feather which the first-named most illustrious King, used to wear on
his crest.' Now who was the first-named most illustrious King, who
before that used to wear it?"

"The King of Bohemia."

"Rubbish! Arderne means his own King, 'Edward the King.' He means that
the Black Prince, after winning his spurs by his victory over the
Bohemian, took his father's insignia. He had only been knighted six
weeks and waited to wear his father's crest until he had earned it."

"By Jove, sir!" Basset exclaimed, "I believe you are right!"

"Of course I am! The evidence is all that way. The Black Prince's
brothers wore it; surely not because their brother had done something,
but because it was their father's crest, probably derived from their
mother, Philippa of Hainault? If you will look in the inventory of
jewels made on the usurpation of Henry the Fourth you will see this
item, 'A collar of the livery of the Queen, on whom God have mercy,
with an ostrich.'"

"But that," Basset interposed, "was Queen Anne of Bohemia--she died
seven years before. There you get Bohemia again!"

"Compare this other entry," replied the antiquary, unmoved: "'A collar
of the livery of Queen Anne, of branches of rosemary.' Now either
Queen Anne of Bohemia had two liveries--which is unlikely--or the
inventory made by order of Henry IV. quotes verbatim from lists made
during the lifetime of Queen Anne; if this be the case, the last
deceased Queen, on whom God have mercy, would be Philippa of Hainault;
and we have here a clear statement that her livery was an ostrich, of
which ostrich her husband wore a feather on his crest."

Basset clapped his hands. Mary beat applause on the table. "Hurrah!"
she cried. "Audley for ever!"

"Miss Audley," Basset said, "Toft shall bring in hot water, and we
will have punch!"

"Miss Audley!" her uncle exclaimed, with a wrinkling nose. "Why don't
you call her Mary? And why, child, don't you call him Peter?"

Mary curtseyed. "Why not, my lord?" she said. "Peter it shall
be--Peter who keeps the keys that you discover!"

And Peter laughed. But he saw that she used his name without a blush
or a tremor, whereas he knew that if he could force his lips to frame
her name, the word would betray him. For by this time, from his seat
at his remote table, and from the ambush of his book, he had watched
her too often for his peace, and too closely not to know that she was
indifferent to him. He knew that at the best she felt a liking for
him, the growth of habit, and tinged, he feared, with contempt.

He was so far right that there were three persons in the house who had
a larger share of the girl's thoughts than he had. The first was John
Audley. He puzzled her. There were times when she could not doubt his
affection, times when he seemed all that she could desire, kind,
good-humored, frank, engaged with the simplicity of a child in
innocent pursuits, and without one thought beyond them. But touch
a certain spot, approach with steps ever so delicate a certain
subject--Lord Audley and his title--and his manner changed, the very
man changed, he became secretive, suspicious, menacing. Nor, however
quickly she might withdraw from the danger-line, could the harm be
undone at once. He would remain for hours gloomy and thoughtful, would
eye her covertly and with suspicion, would sit silent through meals,
and at times mutter to himself. More rarely he would turn on her with
a face which rage made inhuman, a face that she did not know, and with
a shaking hand he would bid her go--go, and leave the room!

The first time that this happened she feared that he might follow up
his words by sending her away. But nothing ensued, then or later. For
a while after each outburst he would appear ill at ease. He would
avoid her eyes, and look away from her in a manner almost as
unpleasant as his violence; later, in a shamefaced way, he would tell
her that she must not excite him, she must not excite him, it was bad
for him. And the man-servant meeting her in the hall, would take the
liberty of giving her the same advice.

Toft, indeed, was the second who puzzled her. He was civil, with the
civility of the trained servant, but always there was in his manner a
reserve. And she fancied that he watched her. If she left the house
and glanced back she was certain to see his face at a window, or his
figure in a doorway. Within doors it was the same. He slept out,
living with his wife in the kitchen wing, which had a separate
entrance from the courtyard. But he was everywhere at all hours. Even
his master appeared uneasy in his presence, and either broke off what
he was saying when the man entered, or continued the talk on another
note. More rarely he turned on Toft and without rhyme or reason would
ask him harshly what he wanted.

The third person to share Mary's thoughts, but after a more pleasant
fashion, was Toft's daughter, Etruria. "I hope you will like her, my
dear," John Audley had said. "She will give you such attendance as you
require, and will share the south wing with you at night. The two
bedrooms there are on a separate staircase. I sleep above the library
in this wing, and Peter in the tower room--we have our own staircase.
I have brought her into the house because I thought you might not like
to sleep alone in that wing."

Mary had thanked him, and had said how much she liked the girl. And
she had liked her, but for a time she had not understood her. Etruria
was all that was good and almost all that was beautiful. She was
simple, kindly, helpful, having the wide low brow, the placid eyes,
and perfect complexion of a Quaker girl--and to add to these
attractions she was finely shaped, though rather plump than slender;
and she was incredibly neat. Nor could any Quaker girl have been more
gentle or more demure.

But she might have had no tongue, she was so loth to use it; and a
hundred times Mary wondered what was behind that reticence. Sometimes
she thought that the girl was merely stupid. Sometimes she yoked her
with her father in the suspicions she entertained of him. More often,
moved by the girl's meek eyes, she felt only a vague irritation. She
was herself calm by nature, and reserved by training, the last to
gossip with a servant, even with one whose refinement appeared innate.
But Etruria's dumbness was beyond her.

One day in a research which she was making she fancied that she had
hit on a discovery. It happened that Etruria came into the room at the
moment, and in the fulness of her heart Mary told her of it.
"Etruria," she said, "I've made a discovery all by myself."

"Yes, Miss."

"Something that no one has known for hundreds of years! Think of
that!"

"Indeed, Miss."

Provoked, Mary took a new line. "Etruria," she asked, "are you happy?"

The girl did not answer.

"Don't you hear me? I asked if you were happy."

"I am content, Miss."

"I did not ask that. Are you happy?"

And then, moved on her side, perhaps, by an impulse towards
confidence, Etruria yielded. "I don't think that we can any of us be
happy, Miss," she said, "with so much sorrow about us."

"You strange girl!" Mary cried, taken aback. "What do you mean?"

But Etruria was silent.

"Come," Mary insisted. "You must tell me what you mean."

"Well, Miss," the girl answered reluctantly, "I'm sad and loth to
think of all the suffering in the world. It's natural that you should
not think of it, but I'm of the people, and I'm sad for them."

Balaam when the ass spoke was scarcely more surprised than Mary.
"Why?" she asked.

The girl pointed to the open window. "We've all we could ask,
Miss--light and air and birds' songs and sunshine. We've all we need,
and more. But I come of those who have neither light nor air, nor
songs nor sunshine, who've no milk for children nor food for mothers!
Who, if they've work, work every hour of the day in dust and noise and
heat. Who are half clemmed from year's end to year's end, and see no
close to it, no hope, no finish but the pauper's deals! It's for them
I'm sad, Miss."

"Etruria!"

"They've no teachers and no time to care," Etruria continued in
desperate earnest now that the floodgates were raised. "They're just
tools to make money, and, like the tools, they wear out and are cast
aside! For there are always more to do their work, to begin where they
began, and to be worn out as they were worn out!"

"Don't!" Mary cried.

Etruria was silent, but two large tears rolled down her face. And Mary
marvelled. So this mild, patient girl, going about her daily tasks,
could think, could feel, could speak, and upon a plane so high that
the listener was sensible of humiliation as well as surprise! For a
moment this was the only effect made upon her. Then reflection did its
part--and memory. She recalled that glimpse of the under-world which
she had had on her journey from London. She remembered the noisome
alleys, the cinder wastes, the men toiling half-naked at the furnaces,
the pinched faces of the women; and she remembered also the account
which Lord Audley had given her of the fierce contest between town and
country, plough and forge, land-lord and cotton-lord, which had struck
her so much at the time.

In the charms of her new life, in her new interests, these things had
faded from her mind. They recurred now, and she did not again ask
Etruria what she meant. "Is it as bad as that?" she asked.

"It is not as bad as it has been," Etruria answered. "Three years ago
there were hundreds of thousands out of work. There are thousands,
scores of thousands, still; and thousands have no food but what's
given them. And charity is bitter to many," she added, "and the
poorhouse is bitter to all."

"But what has caused things to be so bad?"

"Some say one thing and some another. But most that machines lower
wages, Miss, and the bread-tax raises food."

"Ah!" Mary said. And she looked more closely at the girl who knew so
much that was at odds with her station.

"Others," Etruria continued, a faint color in her cheeks, "think that
it is selfishness, that every one is for himself and no one for one
another, and----"

"Yes?" Mary said, seeing that she hesitated.

"And that if every one thought as much of his neighbor as of himself,
or even of his neighbor as well as of himself, it would not be
machines nor corn-taxes nor poorhouses would be strong enough to take
the bread out of the children's mouths or the work out of men's
hands!"

Mary had an inspiration. "Etruria," she cried, "some one has been
teaching you this."

The girl blushed. "Well, Miss," she said simply, "it was at church I
learned most of it."

"At church? What church? Not Riddsley?" For it was to Riddsley, to a
service as dull as it was long, that they proceeded on Sundays in a
chaise as slow as the reader.

"No, Miss, not Riddsley," Etruria answered. "It's at Brown Heath on
the Chase. But it's not a real church, Miss. It's a room."

"Oh!" Mary replied. "A meeting-house!"

For some reason Etruria's eyes gleamed. "No, Miss," she said. "It's
the curate at Riddsley has a service in a room at Brown Heath on
Thursdays."

"And you go?"

"When I can, Miss."

The idea of attending church on a week-day was strange to Mary; as
strange as to that generation was the zeal that passed beyond the
common channel to refresh those whom migrations of population or
changes in industry had left high and dry. The Tractarian movement was
giving vigor not only to those who supported it, but to those who
withstood it.

"And you've a sermon?" Mary said. "What was the text last Thursday,
Etruria?"

The girl hesitated, considered, then looked with appeal at her
mistress. She clasped her hands. "'Two are better than one,'" she
replied, "'because they have good reward for their labor. For if they
fall, one will lift up his fellow, but woe to him that is alone when
he falleth, for he hath not another to lift him up.'"

"Gracious, Etruria!" Mary cried. "Is that in the Bible?"

Etruria nodded.

"And what did your preacher say about it?"

"That the employer and the workman were fellows, and if they worked
together and each thought for the other they would have a good reward
for their labor; that if one fell, it was the duty of the other to
help him up. And again, that the land and the mill were fellows--the
town and the country--and if they worked together in love they would
have a good return, and if trouble came to one the other should
bear with him. But all the same," Etruria added timidly, "that the
bread-taxes were wrong."

"Etruria," Mary said. "To-morrow is Thursday. I shall go with you to
Brown Heath."





                              CHAPTER X

                              NEW THINGS


Mary Audley, crossing the moor to a week-day service, was but one of
many who in the 'forties were venturing on new courses. In religion
there were those who fancied that by a return to primitive forms they
might recapture the primitive fervor; and those again who, like the
curate whom Mary was going to hear, were bent on pursuing the beaten
path into new places. Some thought that they had found a panacea for
the evils of the day in education, and put their faith in workmen's
institutes and night schools. Others were satisfied with philanthropy,
and proclaimed that infants of seven ought not to toil for their
living, that coal-pits were not fit places for women, and that what
paid was not the only standard of life. A few dreamt of a new England
in which gentle and simple were to mix on new-old terms; and a
multitude, shrewd and hard-headed, believed in the Corn Law League,
whose speakers travelled from Manchester to carry the claims of cheap
bread to butter crosses and market towns, and there bearded the very
landlord's agent.

The truth was that the country was lying sick with new evils, and had
perforce to find a cure, whether that cure lay in faith, or in the
primer, or in the Golden Rule, or in Adam Smith. For two generations
men had been quitting the field for the mill, the farm for the
coal-pit. They had followed their work into towns built haphazard,
that grew presently into cities. There, short of light, of air, of
water, lacking decency, lacking even votes--for the Reform Bill,
that was to give everything to everybody, had stopped at the
masters--lacking everything but wages, they swarmed in numbers
stupendous and alarming to the mind of that day. And then the wages
failed. Machines pushed out hands, though


              Tools were made, and born were hands,
              Every farmer understands.


Machines lowered wages, machines glutted the markets. Men could get no
work, masters could sell no goods. On the top of this came bad seasons
and dear bread. Presently hundreds of thousands were living on public
charity, long lists of masters were in the _Gazette_. In the gloomy
cities of the North, masses of men heaved and moaned as the sea when
the south-west wind falls upon it.

All but the most thoughtless saw danger as well as unhappiness in
this, and called on their gods. The Chartists proclaimed that safety
lay in votes. The landed interest thought that a little more
protection might mend matters. The Golden Rulers were for shorter
hours. But the men who were the loudest and the most confident cried
that cheap bread would mend all. The poor, they said, would have to
eat and to spend. They would buy goods, the glut would cease. The
wheels would turn again, there would be work and wages. The Golden Age
would return. So preached the Manchester men.

In the meantime the doctors wrangled, and the patient grew a little,
not much, better. And Mary Audley and Etruria walked across the
moorland in the evening sunshine, with a light breeze stirring the
bracken, and waves of shadow moving athwart the stretches of purple
ling. They seemed very far, very remote from the struggle for life and
work and bread that was passing in the world below.

Presently they dropped into a fern-clad dingle and saw below them,
beside the rivulet that made music in its bottom, a house or two.
Descending farther, they came on more houses, crawling up the hill
slopes, and on a few potato patches and ash-heaps. As the sides of the
valley rose higher and closed in above the walkers cottages fell into
lines on either side of the brook, and began to show one behind the
other in rough terraces, with middens that slid from the upper to the
lower level. The valley bent to the left, and quickly tall chimneys
became visible, springing from a huddle of mean roofs through which no
other building of size, no tower, no steeple, rose to break the ugly
sameness. This was Brown Heath.

"It's a rough place," Etruria said as they picked their way. "But
don't be afraid, Miss. I'm often passing, and they know me."

Still it was a rough place. The roadway was a cinder-track, and from
the alleys and lanes above it open drains wormed their way across the
path and into the stream, long grown foul. The air was laden with
smoke, coal dust lay everywhere; the most cleanly must have despaired.
Men seated, pipe in mouth, on low walls, watched the two go by--not
without some rude banter; frowsy women crouching on door-steps and
nursing starveling babes raised sullen faces. Lads in clogs made way
for them unwillingly. In one place a crowd seethed from a side street
and, shouting and struggling, overflowed the roadway before them and
threatened to bar their path.

"It's a dog-fight," Etruria said. "They are rare and fond of them,
Miss. We'd best get by quickly."

They passed in safety, passed, too, a brawl between two colliers, the
air about them thick with oaths, passed a third eddy round two women
fighting before a public-house. "The chaps are none so gentle,"
Etruria said, falling unconsciously into a commoner way of speaking.
"They're all for fighting, dogs or men, and after dark I'm not saying
we'd be safe. But we'll be over the moor by dusk, Miss."

They came, as she spoke, to a triangular space, sloping with the hill,
skirted by houses, and crossed by an open sewer. It was dreary and
cinder-covered, but five publics looked upon it and marked it for the
centre of Brown Heath. Etruria crossed the triangle to a building a
little cleaner than its neighbors; it was the warehouse, she told her
mistress, of a sack-maker who had failed. She entered, and her
companion followed her.

Mary found herself in a bare barn-like room, having two windows set
high in the walls, the light from which fell coldly on a dozen benches
ranged one behind the other, but covering only a portion of the floor.
On these were seated, when they entered, about twenty persons, mainly
women, but including three or four men of the miner class. No attempt
had been made to alter the character of the place, and of formality
there was as little. The two had barely seated themselves before a
lean young man, with a long pale face and large nose, rose from the
front bench, and standing before the little congregation, opened his
book. He wore shabby black, but neither surplice nor gown.

The service lasted perhaps twenty minutes, and Mary was not much
moved by it. The young man's voice was weak, the man himself looked
under-fed. She noticed, however, that as the service went on the
number in the room grew, and when it closed she found that all the
seats were filled, and that there were even a few men--some of them
colliers fresh from the pit--standing at the back. Remembering the odd
text that the clergyman had given out the week before, she wondered
what he would choose to-day, and, faintly amused, she stole a glance
at her companion. But Etruria's rapt face was a reproach to her
levity.

The young clergyman pushed back the hair from his forehead. His
posture was ungainly, he did not know what to do with his hands, he
opened his mouth and shut it again. Then with an effort he began. "My
text, my friends," he said, "is but one word, 'Love.' Where will you
find it in the Scriptures? In every chapter and in every verse. In the
dark days of old the order was 'Thou shalt live!' The new order in
these days is 'Thou shalt love!'" He began by describing the battle of
life in the animal and vegetable world, where all things lived at the
cost of others; and he admitted that the struggle for life, for bread,
for work, as they saw it around them, resembled that struggle. In
moving terms he enlarged on the distress, on the vast numbers lately
living on the rates, on the thousands living, where even the rates
fell short, on Government aid. He described the fireless homes, the
foodless children, the strong men hopeless. And he showed them that
others were stricken, that masters suffered, tradesmen were ruined,
the country languished. "The worst may be past," he said. "You are
working half-time, you are living on half-wages, you are thankful that
things are better." Then he told them that for his part he did not
presume to say what was at the root of these unhappy conditions, but
that of one thing he felt sure--and this was his message to them--that
if the law of love, if the golden rule of preferring another to one's
self, if the precept of that charity,


              Which seeketh not itself to please
              Nor for itself hath any care,
              But for another gives its ease,


if that were followed by all, then all


              Might build a heaven in hell's despair.


And in words more eloquent than he had yet compassed he begged them to
set that example of brotherhood, in the certainty that the worst
social evils, nay, all evils save pain and death, would be cured by
the love that thought for others, that in the master preferred the
servant's welfare and in the servant put first his master's interests.
Finally he quoted his old text, "Let two work together, for if they
fall, one will lift up his fellow!"

It seemed as if he had done. He was silent; his hearers waited. Then
with an effort he continued:

"I have a word to say about something which fell from me in this place
last week. While I did not venture, unskilled as I am, to say where
lies the cause of our distress, I did say that I found it hard to
believe that the system which taxes the bread you earn in the sweat of
your brow, which takes a disproportionate part from the scanty crust
of the widow and from the food of the child, was in accordance with
the law of love. I repeat that now; and because I have been told that
I dare not say in the pulpit of Riddsley church what I say here, I
shall on the first opportunity state my belief there. You may ask why
I have not done so; my answer is, that I am there the representative
of another, whereas in this voluntary work I am myself more
responsible. In saying that I ask you to judge me, as we should judge
all, with that charity which believeth no evil."

A moment later Mary, deeply moved, was passing out with the crowd. As
she stood, caught in the press by the door, an old man in horn-rimmed
glasses, who was waiting there, held out his hand. She was going to
take it, when she saw that it was not meant for her, but for the young
clergyman who was following at her heels.

"Master, dunno you do it," the old fellow growled. "You'll break your
pick, and naught gotten. Naught gotten, that'll serve. Your gaffer'll
not abide it, and you'll lose your job!"

"Would you have me take it," the young man answered, "and not do the
work, Cluff? Never fear for me."

"Dunno you be rash, master!" the other rejoined, clutching his sleeve
and detaining him. "You be sure----"

Mary heard no more. She felt Etruria's hand pressing her arm. "We'd
best lose no time," the girl whispered. And she drew Mary onward,
across the triangle and into the lane which led to the moor.

"Are we so late?" The sun had set, but it was still light. "We'd best
hurry," Etruria persisted, increasing her speed.

Mary looked at her and saw that she was troubled, but at the moment
she set this down to the influence of the sermon, and her own mind
went back to it. "I am glad you brought me, Etruria," she said. "I
shall always be glad that I came."

"We'd best be getting home now," was Etruria's only answer, but this
time Mary's ear caught the sound of footsteps behind them, and she
turned. The young clergyman was hastening after them.

"Etruria!" he cried.

For a moment Mary fancied that Etruria did not hear. The girl hurried
on. But Mary saw no occasion to run away, and she halted. Then
Etruria, with a gesture of despair, stopped.

"It is no use," she said.

The young man came up with them. His head was bare, his hat was in his
hand, his long plain face was aglow with the haste he had made. He had
heard Etruria's words, and "It is of every use," he said.

"This is--my mistress," Etruria said.

"Miss Audley?"

"I am Miss Audley," Mary announced, wondering much.

"I thought that it might be so," he replied. "I have waited for such
an occasion. I am Mr. Colet, the curate at Riddsley. Etruria and I
love one another," he continued. "We are going to be married, if ever
my means allow me to marry."

"No, we are not," the girl rejoined sharply. "Mr. Colet knows my
mind," she continued, her eyes turned away. "I have told him many
times that I am a servant, the daughter of a servant, in a different
class from his, and I'll never be the one to ruin him and be a
disgrace to him! I'll never marry him! Never!"

"And I have told Etruria," he replied, "that I will never take that
answer. We love one another. It is nothing to me that she is a
servant. My work is to serve. I am as poor as it is possible to be,
with as poor prospects as it is possible to have. I shall never be
anything but what I am, and I shall think myself rich when I have a
hundred pounds a year. I who have so little, who look for so little,
am I to give up this happiness because Etruria has less? I, too, say,
Never!"

Mary, standing between them, did not know what to answer, and it was
Etruria who replied. "It is useless," she said. And then, in a tone of
honest scorn, "Who ever heard," she cried, "of a clergyman who married
a servant? Or who ever heard of good coming of it?"

Mary had an inspiration. "Does Etruria's father know?" she asked.

"He knows and approves," the young man replied, his eyes bent fondly
on his mistress.

Mary too looked at Etruria--beautiful, patient, a servant, loved. And
she wondered. All these weeks she had been rubbing elbows with this
romance, and she had not discerned it! Now, while her sympathies flew
to the lover's side, her prejudices rose up against him. They echoed
Etruria's words, "Who ever heard of good coming of such a match?" The
days had been, as Mary knew, when the chaplain had married the lady's
maid. But those days were gone. Meantime the man waited, and she did
not know what to say.

"After all," she said at last, "it is for Etruria to decide."

"No, it is for us both to decide," he replied. And then, as if he
thought that he had sufficiently stated his case, "I ask your pardon,
Miss Audley, for intruding," he continued. "I am keeping you, and as I
am going your way that is needless. I have had a message from a sick
woman, and I am on my way to see her."

He took permission for granted, and though Etruria's very shoulders
forbade him, he moved on beside them. "Conditions are better here than
in many places," he said, "but in this village you would see much to
sadden you."

"I have seen enough," Mary answered, "to know that."

"Ten years ago there was not a house here. Now there is a population
of two thousand, no church, no school, no gentry, no one of the better
class. There is a kind of club, a centre of wild talk; better that,
perhaps, than apathy."

"Is it in Riddsley parish?" Mary asked. They were nearly clear of the
houses, and the slopes of the hill, pale green in the peaceful evening
light, began to rise on either side. It was growing dusk, and from the
moorland above came the shrill cries of plovers.

"Yes, it is in Riddsley parish," he answered, "but many miles from the
town, and as aloof from it--Riddsley is purely agricultural--as black
from white. In such places as this--and there are many of them in
Staffordshire, as raw, as rough, and as new--there is work for plain
men and plain women. In these swarming hives there is no room for any
refinement but true refinement. And the Church must learn to do her
work with plain tools, or the work will pass into other hands."

"You may cut cheese with an onion knife," Etruria said coldly. "I
don't know that people like it."

"I know nothing better than onions in the right place," he replied.

"That's not in cheese," she rejoined, to Mary's amusement.

"The poor get little cheese," he said, "and the main thing is to cut
their bread for them. But here I must leave you. My errand is to that
cottage."

He pointed to a solitary house, standing a few score paces above the
road on the hillside. Mary shook hands with him, but Etruria turned
her shoulder resolutely.

"Good-bye, Etruria," he said. And then to Mary, "I hope that I have
made a friend?"

"I think you have," she answered. "I am sure that you deserve one."

He colored, raised his hat, and turned away, and the two went on,
without looking back; darkness was coming apace, and they were still
two miles from home. Mary kept silence, prudently considering how she
should deal with the matter, and what she should say to her companion.
As it fell out, events removed her difficulty. They had not gone more
than two hundred yards, and were still some way below the level of the
Chase, when a cry reached them. It came out of the dusk behind them,
and might have been the call of a curlew on the moor. But first one,
and then the other stood. They turned, and listened, and suddenly
Etruria, more anxious or sharper of eye than her mistress, uttered a
cry and broke away at a run across the sloping turf towards the
solitary cottage. Alarmed, Mary looked intently in that direction, and
made out three or four figures struggling before the door of the
house. She guessed then that the clergyman was one of them, and that
the cry had come from him, and without a thought for herself she set
off, running after Etruria as fast as she could.

Twice Etruria screamed as she ran, and Mary echoed the cry. She saw
that the man was defending himself against the onset of three or
four--she could hear the clatter of sticks on one another. Then she
trod on her skirt and fell. When she had got, breathless, to her feet
again, the clergyman was down and the men appeared to be raining blows
on him. Etruria shrieked once more and the next moment was lost amid
the moving figures, the brandished sticks, the struggle.

Mary ran on desperately. She caught sight of the girl on her knees
over the fallen man, she saw her fend off more than one blow, she
heard more than one blow fall with a sickening thud. She came up to
them. With passion that drove out fear, she seized the arm of the
nearest and dragged him back.

"You coward!" she cried. "You coward! I am Miss Audley! Do you hear!
Leave him! Leave him, I say!"

Her appearance, the surprise, checked the man; her fearlessness,
perhaps her name, gave the others pause. They retreated a step. The
man she had grasped shook himself free, but did not attempt to strike
her. "Oh, d--n the screech-owls!" he cried. "The place is alive with
them! Hold your noise, you fools! We'll have the parish on us!"

"I am Miss Audley!" Mary repeated, and in her indignation she advanced
on him. "How dare you?" Etruria, still on her knees, continued to
shriek.

"You're like to get a wipe over the head, dang you!" the man growled,
"whoever you be! Go to---- and mind your own brats! He'll know better
now than to preach against them as he gets his living by! You be
gone!"

But Mary stood her ground. She declared afterwards that, brutally as
the man spoke, the fight had gone out of him. Etruria, on the
contrary, maintained that, finding only women before them, the
ruffians would have murdered them. Fortunately, while the event hung
in the balance, "What is it?" some one shouted from the road below.
"What's the matter there?"

"Murder!" cried Etruria shrilly. "Help! Help!"

"Help!" cried Mary. She still kept her face to the men, but for the
first time she began to know fear.

Footsteps thudded softly on the turf, figures came into view, climbing
the slope. It needed no more. With a volley of oaths the assailants
turned tail and made off. In a trice they were round the corner of the
house and lost in the dusk.

A moment later two men, equally out of breath and each carrying a gun,
reached the spot. "Well!" said the bigger of the two, "What is it?"

He spoke as if he had not come very willingly, but Mary did not notice
this. The crisis over, her knees shook, she could barely stand, she
could not speak. She pointed to the fallen man, over whom Etruria
still crouched, her hair dragged down about her shoulders, her
neckband torn, a ghastly blotch on her white cheek.

"Is he dead?" the new-comer asked in a different tone.

"Ay, dead!" Etruria echoed. "Dead!"

Fortunately the curate gave the lie to the word. He groaned, moved,
with an effort he raised himself on his elbow. "I'm--all right!" he
gasped. "All right!"

Etruria sprang to her feet. She stepped back as if the ground had
opened before her.

"I'm not--hurt," Colet added weakly.

But it was evident that he was hurt, even if no bones were broken.
When they came to lift him he could not stand, and he seemed to be
uncertain where he was. After watching him a moment, "He should see a
doctor," said the man who had come up so opportunely. "Petch," he
continued, addressing his companion, who wore a gamekeeper's dress,
"we must carry him to the trap and get him down to Brown Heath. Who is
he, do you know? He looks like a parson."

"He's Mr. Colet of Riddsley," Mary said.

The man turned and looked at her. "Hallo!" he exclaimed. And then in
the same tone of surprise, "Miss Audley!" he said. "At this time of
night?"

Mary collected herself with an effort. "Yes," she said, "and very
fortunately, for if we had not been here the men would have murdered
him. As it is, you share the credit of saving him, Lord Audley."

"The credit of saving you is a good deal more to me," he answered
gallantly. "I did not think that we should meet after this fashion."




                              CHAPTER XI

                           TACT AND TEMPER


He looked at Etruria, and Mary explained who she was.

"I am afraid that she is hurt."

The girl's temple was bruised and there was blood on her cheek; more
than one of the blows aimed at her lover had fallen on her. But she
said eagerly that it was "Nothing! Nothing!"

"Are you sure, Etruria?" Mary asked with concern.

"It is nothing, indeed, Miss," the girl repeated. She was trying with
shaking fingers to put up her hair.

"Then the sooner," Audley rejoined, "we get this--this gentleman to my
dogcart, the better. Take his other arm, Petch. Miss Audley, can you
carry my gun?--it is not loaded. And you," he continued to Etruria,
"if you are able, take Petch's."

They took the guns, and the little procession wound down the path to
the road, where they found a dogcart awaiting them, and, peering from
the cart, two setters, whining and fretting. The dogs were driven
under the seat, and the clergyman, still muttering that he was all
right, was lifted in. "Steady him, Petch," Audley said; "and do you
drive slowly," he added, to the other man. "You will be at the
surgeon's at Brown Heath in twenty minutes. Stay with him, Petch, and
send the cart back for me."

"But are you not going?" Mary cried.

"I am not going to leave you in the dark with only your maid," he
answered with severity. "One adventure a night is enough, Miss
Audley."

She murmured a word or two, but submitted. The struggle had shaken
her; she could still see the men's savage faces, still hear the thud
of their blows. And she and Etruria had nearly a mile to go before
they reached the park.

When they were fairly started, "How did it happen?" he asked.

Mary told the story, but said no word of Etruria's romance.

"Then you were not with him when they set on him?"

"No, we had parted."

"And you went back?"

"Of course we did!"

"It was imprudent," he said, "very imprudent. If we had not come up at
that moment you might have been murdered."

"And if we had not gone back, Mr. Colet might have been murdered!" she
answered. "What he had done to offend them----"

"I think I can tell you that. He's the curate at Riddsley, isn't he?
Who's been preaching up cheap bread and preaching down the farmers?"

"Perhaps so," Mary answered. "He may be. But is he to be murdered for
that? From your tone one might think so."

"No," he replied slowly, "he is not to be murdered for it. But whether
he is wise to preach cheap bread to starving men, whether he is wise
to tell them that they would have it but for this man or that man,
this class or that class--is another matter."

She was not convinced--the sermon had keyed her thoughts to a high
pitch. But he spoke reasonably, and he had the knack of speaking with
authority, and she said no more. And on his side he had no wish to
quarrel. He had come down to Riddsley partly to shoot, partly to look
into the political situation, but a little--there was no denying
it--to learn how Mary Audley fared with her uncle.

For he had thought much of her since they had parted, and much of the
fact that she was John Audley's heir. Her beauty, her spirit, her
youth, had caught his fancy. He had looked forward to renewing his
acquaintance with her, and he was in no mood, now he saw her, to spoil
their meeting by a quarrel. He thought Colet, whose doings had been
reported to him, a troublesome, pestilent fellow, and he was not sorry
that he had got his head broken. But he need not tell her that.
Circumstances had favored him in bringing them together and giving him
the beau rôle, and he was not going to cross his luck.

So, "Fire is an excellent thing of course," he continued with an air
of moderation, "but, believe me, it's not safe amid young trees in a
wind. Whatever your views, to express them in all companies may be
honest, but is not wise. I have no doubt that a parson is tried. He
sees the trouble. He is not always the best judge of the remedy.
However, enough of that. We shall agree at least in this, that our
meetings are opportune?"

"Most opportune," Mary answered. "And from my point of view very
fortunate!"

"There really is a sort of fate in it. What but fate could have
brought about our meeting at the Hôtel Lambert? What but fate could
have drawn us to the same spot on the Chase to-night?"

There was a tone in his voice that brought the blood to her cheek and
warned her to keep to the surface of things. "The chance that men call
fate," she answered lightly.

"Or the fate that fools call chance," he urged, half in jest, half in
earnest. "We have met by chance once, and once again--with results!
The third time--what will the third time bring? I wonder."

"Not a fright like this, I hope!" Mary answered, remaining cheerfully
matter of fact. "Or if it does," with a flash of laughter, "I trust
that the next time you will come up a few moments earlier!"

"Ungrateful!"

"I?" she replied. "But it was Etruria who was in danger!"

For the peril had left her with a sense of exhilaration, of lightness,
of ease. She was pleased to feel that she could hold her own with him,
relieved that she was not afraid of him. And she was glad--she was
certainly glad--to see him again. If he were inclined to make the most
of his advantage, well, a little gallantry was quite in the picture;
she was not deceived, and she was not offended. While he on his side,
as they walked over the moor, thought of her as a clever little witch
who knew her value and could keep her head; and he liked her none the
less for it.

When they came at last to the gap in the wall that divided the Chase
from the park, a figure, dimly outlined, stood in the breach waiting
for them. "Is that you?" a voice asked.

The voice was Basset's, and Mary's spirits sank. She felt that the
meeting was ill-timed. "Yes," she answered.

Unluckily, Peter was one of those whose anxiety takes an irritable
form. "What in the world has happened?" he asked. "I couldn't believe
that you were still out. It's really not safe. Hallo!" breaking off
and speaking in a different tone, "is some one with you?"

"Yes," Mary said. They were within touch now and could see one
another. "We have had an adventure. Lord Audley was passing, he came
to our rescue, and has very kindly seen us home."

"Lord Audley!" Basset was taken by surprise and his tone was much as
if he had said, "The devil!"

"By good fortune, Basset," Audley replied. He may have smiled in the
darkness--we cannot say. "I was returning from shooting, heard cries
for help, and found Miss Audley playing the knight-errant, encircled
by prostrate bodies!"

Basset could not frame a word, so great was his surprise, so
overwhelming his chagrin. Was this man to spring up at every turn? To
cross him on every occasion? To put him in the background perpetually?
To intrude even on the peace and fellowship of the Gatehouse? It was
intolerable!

When he did not answer, "It was not I who was the knight-errant," Mary
said. "It was Etruria. She is a little the worse for it, I fear, and
the sooner she is in bed the better. As Mr. Basset is here," she
continued, turning to Audley, "we must not take you farther. Your cart
is no doubt waiting for you. But you will allow us to thank you again.
We are most grateful to you--both Etruria and I."

She spoke more warmly, perhaps she let her hand rest longer in his, to
make up for Basset's silence. For that silence provoked her. She had
gathered from many things that Basset did not love the other; but to
stand mute and churlish on such an occasion, and find no word of
acknowledgment--this was too bad.

And Basset knew, he too knew that he ought to thank Audley. But the
black dog was on his back, and while he hesitated, the other made
his adieux. He said a pleasant word to Etruria, tossed a careless
"Good-night" to the other man, turned away, and was gone.

For awhile the three who remained trudged homewards in silence. Then,
"What happened to you?" Basset asked grudgingly.

Vexed and indignant, Mary told the story.

"I did not know that you knew Mr. Colet!"

"When a man is being murdered," she retorted, "one does not wait for
an introduction."

He was a good fellow, but jealousy was hot within him, and he could
not bridle his tongue. "Oh, but murdered?" he said. "Isn't that rather
absurd? Who would murder Colet?"

Mary did not deign to reply.

Baffled, he sought for another opening. "I do not know what your uncle
will say."

"Because we rescued Mr. Colet? And perhaps saved his life?"

"No, but----"

"Or because Lord Audley rescued us?"

"He will certainly not be pleased to hear that," he retorted
maliciously. He knew that he was misbehaving, but he could not
refrain. "If you take my advice you will not mention it."

"I shall tell him the moment I reach the house," she declared.

"You will be very unwise if you do."

"I shall be honest at least! For the rest I would rather not discuss
the matter, Mr. Basset. I am a good deal shaken by what we have gone
through, and I am very tired."

He muttered humbly that he was sorry--that he only meant----

"Please leave it there," she said. "Enough has been said."

Too late the anger and the spirit died out of the unlucky man, and he
would have grovelled before her, he would have done anything to earn
his pardon. But Etruria's presence tied his tongue, and gloomy and
wretched--oh, why had he not gone farther to meet them, why had he not
been the one to rescue her?--he walked on beside them, cursing his
unhappy temper. It was dark, the tired girls lagged, Etruria hung
heavily on her mistress's arm; he longed to help them. But he did not
dare to offer. He knew too well that Mary would reject the offer.

Etruria had her own dreams, and in spite of an aching head was happy.
But to Mary, fatigued by the walk, and vexed by Basset's conduct, the
way seemed endless. At last the house loomed dark above them, their
steps rang hard on the flagged court. The outer door stood ajar, and
entering, they found a lamp burning in the hall; but the silence which
prevailed, above and below, struck a chill. Silence and an open door
go ill together.

Etruria at Mary's bidding went up at once to her room. Basset called
angrily for Toft. But no Toft appeared, and Mary, resentment still hot
in her, opened the door of the library and went in to see her uncle.
She felt that the sooner her story was told the better.

But the library was empty. Lights burned on the several tables, the
wood fire smouldered on the hearth, the tall clock ticked in the
silence, the old hound flopped his tail. But John Audley was not
there.

"Where is my uncle?" she asked, as she stood in the open doorway.

Basset looked over her shoulder. He saw that the room was empty. "He
may have gone to look for us."

"And Toft?"

"And Toft, too, I suppose."

"But why should my uncle go to look for us?" she asked, aghast at the
thought--he troubled himself so little for others, he lived so
completely his own life!

"He might," Basset replied. He stood for a moment, thinking. Then--for
the time they had forgotten their quarrel--"You had better get
something to eat and go to bed," he said. "I will send Mrs. Toft to
you."

She had not the strength to resist. "Very well," she said. "Are you
going to look for them?"

"Perhaps Mrs. Toft will know where they are."

She took her candle and went slowly up the narrow winding staircase
that led to her room and to Etruria's. As she passed, stair by stair,
the curving wainscot of dull wood which so many generations had
rubbed, she carried with her the picture of Basset standing in thought
in the middle of the hall, his eyes on the doorway that gaped on the
night. Then a big man with a genial face usurped his place; and she
smiled and sighed.

A moment later she went into Etruria's room to learn how she was, and
caught the girl rising from her knees. "Oh, Miss," she said, coloring
as she met Mary's eyes, "if we had not been there!"

"And yet--you won't marry him, you foolish girl?"

"Oh no, no!"

"Although you love him!"

"Love him!" Etruria murmured, her face burning. "It is because I love
him, Miss, that I will never, never marry him."

Mary wondered. "And yet you love him?" she said, raising the candle so
that its light fell on the other's face.

Etruria looked this way and that way, but there was no escape. In a
very small voice she said,


             "Love seeketh not itself to please
              Nor for itself hath any care!"


She covered her hot cheeks with her hands. But Mary took away the
hands and kissed her.

"Oh, Miss!" Etruria exclaimed.

Mary went out then, but on the threshold of her own room she paused to
snuff her candle. "So that is love," she thought. "It's very
interesting, and--and rather beautiful!"




                             CHAPTER XII

                             THE YEW WALK


Basset had been absent the greater part of the day, and returning at
sunset had learned that Miss Audley had not come back from Brown
Heath. The servant had hinted alarm--the Chase was lonely, the hour
late; and Basset had hurried off without more, not doubting that John
Audley was in the house.

Now he was sure that John Audley had been abroad at the time, and he
suspected that Toft had known it, and had kept it from him. He stood
for a moment in thought, then he crossed the court to Toft's house.
Mrs. Toft was cooking something savory in a bonnet before the fire,
and the contrast between her warm cheerful kitchen and the stillness
of the house from which he came struck him painfully. He told her that
her daughter had received a blow on the head, and that Miss Audley
needed supper--she had better attend to them.

Mrs. Toft was a stout woman, set by a placid and even temper above
small surprises. She looked at the clock, a fork in her hand. "I can't
hurry it, Mr. Basset," she said. "You may be Sir Robert Peel himself,
but meat's your master and will have its time. A knock on the head?"
she continued, with a faint stirring of anxiety. "You don't say so?
Lor, Mr. Basset, who'd go to touch Etruria?"

"You'd better go and see."

"But where's Toft?"

Basset's temper gave way at that. "God knows!" he said. "He ought to
be here--and he's not!" He went out.

Mrs. Toft stared after him, and by and by she let down her skirt and
prepared to go into the house. "On the head?" she ruminated. "Well,
'Truria's a tidy lot of hair! And I will say this, if there's few
points a man gives a woman, hair's one of them."

Meanwhile Basset had struck across the court and taken in the darkness
the track which led in the direction of the Great House. The breeze,
light but of an autumn coldness, swept the upland, whispering through
the dying fern, and rustling in the clumps of trees by which he
steered his course. He listened more than once, hoping that he might
hear approaching footsteps, but he heard none, and presently he came
to the yew-trees that masked the entrance to the gardens.

The trees formed a wall of blackness exceeding that of the darkest
night, and Basset hesitated before he plunged into it. The growth of a
century had long trespassed on the walk, a hundred and fifty yards
long, which led through the yew-wood, and had been in its time a
stately avenue trimmed to the neatness of a bowling green. Now it was
little better than a tunnel, dark even at noon, and at night bristling
with a hundred perils. Basset peered into the blackness, listened,
hesitated. But he was honestly anxious on John Audley's account, and
contenting himself with exclaiming that the man was mad, he began to
grope his way along the path.

It was no pleasant task. If he swerved from his course he stumbled
over roots, branches swept his cheek, jagged points threatened his
eyes, and more than once he found himself in the hedge. Half-way
through the wood he came to a circular clearing, some twenty yards
across; and here a glimmer of light enabled him to avoid the crumbling
stone Butterfly that crouched on its mouldering base in the centre of
the clearing--much as a spider crouches in its web. It seemed in that
dim light to be the demon of this underworld, a monster, a thing of
evil.

The same gleam, however, disclosed the opposite opening, and for
another seventy yards he groped his way onward, longing to be clear of
the stifling air, and the brooding fancies that dwelt in it, longing
to plant his feet on something more solid than this carpet of rotting
yew. At last he came to the tall, strait gate, wrought of old iron,
that admitted to the pleasance. It was ajar. He passed through it, and
with relief he felt the hard walk under his feet, the fresh air on his
face. He crossed the walk, and stepping on to the neglected lawn, he
halted.

The Great House loomed before him, a hundred yards away. The moon had
not risen, but the brightness which goes before its rising lightened
the sky behind the monstrous building. It outlined the roof but left
the bulk in gloom. No light showed in any part, and it was only the
watcher's memory that pictured the quaint casements of the north wing,
or filled in the bald rows of unglazed windows, which made of the new
portion a death-mask. In that north wing just eighty years before, in
a room hung with old Cordovan leather, the fatal house-warming had
been held. The duel had been fought at sunrise within a pace or two of
the moss-grown Butterfly that Basset had passed; and through the gate
of ironwork, wood-smelted and wrought with the arms of Audley, which
had opened at his touch, they had carried the dead heir back to his
father. Tradition had it that the servant who bore in the old lord's
morning draught of cool ale had borne also the tragic news to his
bedside.

Basset remembered that the hinges of the gate, seldom as it was used,
had not creaked, and he felt sure that he was on the right track. He
scanned the dark house, and tried to sift from the soughing of the
wind any sound that might inform him.

Presently he moved forward and scrutinized with care the north wing,
which abutted on the yew-wood. There lay between the two only a strip
of formal garden, once set with rows of birds and beasts cut in yew.
Time had turned these to monsters, huge, amorphous, menacing, amidst
which rank grass rioted and elder pushed. Even in daylight it seemed
as if the ancient trees stretched out arms to embrace and strangle the
deserted house.

But the north wing remained as dark as the bulk of the house, and
Basset uttered a sigh of relief. Ill-humor began to take the place of
misgiving. He called himself a fool for his pains and anticipated with
distaste a return through the yew-walk. However, the sooner he
undertook the passage the sooner it would be over, and he was turning
on his heel when somewhere between him and the old wing a stick
snapped.

Under a foot, he fancied; and he waited. In two or three minutes the
moon would rise.

Again he caught a faint sound. It resembled the stealthy tread of some
one approaching from the north wing, and Basset, peering that way, was
striving to probe the darkness, when a gleam of light shot across his
eyes. He turned and saw in the main building a bright spark. It
vanished. He waited to see it again, and while he waited a second
stick snapped. This time the sound was behind him, and near the iron
gate.

He had been outflanked, and he had now to choose which he would stalk,
the footstep or the light. He chose the latter, the rather as while he
stood with his eyes fixed on the house the upper edge of a rising moon
peeped above the roof.

He stepped back to the gate, and in the shadow of the trees he waited.
Two or three minutes passed. The moon rose clear of the roof,
outlining the stately chimneys and gables and flooding with cold light
the lower part of the lawn. With the rising of the moon the air grew
more chilly. He shivered.

At length a dull sound reached him--the sound of a closing door or a
shutter cast back. A minute later he heard the footsteps of some one
moving along the walk towards him. The man trod with care, but once he
stumbled.

Basset advanced. "Is that you, sir?" he asked.

"D--n!" John Audley replied out of the darkness. He halted, breathing
quickly.

"I say d--n, too!" Basset replied. As a rule he was patient with the
old man, but to-night his temper failed him.

The other came on. "Why did you follow me?" he asked. "What is the
use? What is the use? If you are willing to help me, good! But if not,
why do you follow me?"

"To see that you don't come to harm," Basset retorted. "As you
certainly will one of these nights if you come here alone."

"Well, I haven't come to harm to-night! On the contrary---- But there,
there, man, let us get back."

"The sooner the better," Basset replied. "I nearly put out an eye as I
came."

John Audley laughed. "Did you come through the yews in the dark?" he
asked.

"Didn't you?"

"No, I brought a lantern." He removed as he spoke the cap of a small
bull's-eye lantern and threw its light on the path. "Who's the fool
now?"

"Let us get home," Basset snapped.

John Audley locked the iron gate behind them and they started. The
light removed their worst difficulties and they reached the open park
without mishap. But long before they gained the house the elder man's
strength failed, and he was glad to lean on Basset's arm. On that a
sense of weakness on the one side and of pity on the other closed
their differences. "After all," Audley said wearily, "I don't know
what I should have done if you had not come."

"You'd have stayed there!"

"And that would have been--Heavens, what a pity that would have been!"
Audley paused and struck his stick on the ground. "I must take care of
myself, I must take care of myself! You don't know, Basset, what
I----"

"And I don't want to know--here!" Basset replied. "When you are safe
at home, you may tell me what you like."

In the courtyard they came on Toft, who was looking out for them with
a lantern. "Thank God, you're safe, sir," he said. "I was growing
alarmed about you."

"Where were you," Basset asked sharply, "when I came in?" John Audley
was too tired to speak.

"I had stepped out at the front to look for the master," Toft replied.
"I fancied that he had gone out that way."

Basset did not believe him, but he could not refute the story. "Well,
get the brandy," he said, "and bring it to the library. Mr. Audley has
been out too long and is tired."

They went into the library and Toft pulled off his master's boots and
brought his slippers and the spirit-tray. That done, he lingered, and
Basset thought that he was trying to divine from the old man's looks
whether the journey had been fruitful.

In the end, however, the man had to go, and Audley leant forward to
speak.

"Wait!" Basset muttered. "He is coming back."

"How do you know?"

Basset raised his hand. The door opened. Toft came in. "I forgot to
take your boots, sir," he said.

"Well, take them now," his master replied peevishly. When the man had
again withdrawn, "How did you know?" he asked, frowning at the fire.

"I saw him go to take your boots--and leave them."

Audley was silent for a time, then "Well," he said, "he has been with
me many years and I think he is faithful."

"To his own interests. He dogged you to-night."

"So did you!"

"Yes, but I did not hide! And he did, and hid from me, too, and lied
about it. How long he had been watching you, I cannot say, but if you
think that you can break through all your habits, sir, and be missing
for two hours at night and a man as shrewd as Toft suspect nothing,
you are mistaken. Of course he wonders. The next time he thinks it
over. The third time he follows you. Presently whatever you know he
will know."

"Confound him!" Audley turned to the table and jerked some brandy into
a glass. Then, "You haven't asked yet," he said, "what I've done."

"If I am to choose," Basset replied, "I would rather not know. You
know my views."

"I know that you didn't think I should do it? Well, I've done it!"

"Do you mean that--you've found the evidence?"

"Is it likely?" the other replied petulantly. "No, but I've been in
the Muniment Room. It is fifty years since I heard my father describe
its position, but I could have gone to it blindfold! I was a boy then,
and the name--he was telling a story of the old lord--took my fancy. I
listened. In time the thing faded, but one day when I was at the
lawyer's and some one mentioned the Muniment Room, the story came back
to me so clearly, that I could almost repeat my father's words."

"And you've been in the room?"

"I've been in it. Why not? A door two inches thick and studded with
iron, and a lock that one out of any dozen big keys would open!" He
rubbed his calves in his satisfaction. "In twenty minutes I was
inside."

"And it was empty?"

"It was empty," the other agreed, with a cunning smile. "As bare as a
board. A little whitewashed room, just as my father described it!"

"They had removed the papers?"

"To the bank, or to London, or to Stubbs's. The place was as clean as
a platter! Not a length of green tape or an end of parchment was
left!"

"Then what have you gained?" Basset asked.

Audley looked slyly at him, his head on one side. "Ay, what?" he said.
"But I'll tell you my father's story. At one time the part of the room
under the stairs was crumbling and the rats got in. The steward told
the old lord and he went to see it. 'Brick it up!' he said. The
steward objected that there would not be room--the place was full;
there were boxes everywhere, some under the stairs. The old lord
tapped one of the boxes with his gold-headed cane. 'What's in these!'
he asked. 'Old papers,' the steward explained. 'Of no use, my lord,
but curious; old leases for lives, and terriers.' 'Terriers?' cried
the old lord. 'Then, by G--d, brick 'em up with the rats!' And that
day at dinner he told my father the story and chuckled over it."

"And that's what you've had in your mind all this time?" Basset said.
"Do you think it was done?"

"The old lord bricked up many a pipe of port, and I think that he
would do it for the jest's sake. And"-- John Audley turned and looked
in his companion's face--"the part under the stairs _is bricked up_,
and the room is as square and as flush as the family vault--and very
like it. The old lord," he added sardonically, "knows what it is to be
bricked up himself now."

"And still there may be nothing there to help you."

Audley rose from his chair. "Don't say it!" he cried passionately. "Or
I'll say that there's no right in the world, no law, no providence, no
God! Don't dare to say it!" he continued, his cheeks trembling with
excitement. "If I believed that I should go mad! But it is there! It
is there! Do you think that it was for naught I heard that story? That
it was for naught I remembered it, for naught I've carried the story
in my mind all these years? No, they are there, the papers that will
give me mine and give it to Mary after me! They are there! And you
must help me to get them."

"I cannot do it, sir," Basset replied firmly. "I don't think that you
understand what you ask. To break into Audley's house like any common
burglar, to dig down his wall, to steal his deeds----"

John Audley shook his fist in the young man's face. "His house!" he
shrieked. "His wall! His deeds! No, fool, but my house, my wall, my
deeds! my deeds! If the papers are there all's mine! All! And I am but
taking my own! Can't you see that? Can't you see it? Have I no right
to take what is my own?"

"But if the papers are not there?" Basset replied gravely. "No, sir,
if you will take my advice you will tell your story, apply to the
court, and let the court examine the documents. That's the
straightforward course."

John Audley flung out his arms. "Man!" he cried. "Don't you know that
as long as he is in possession he can sit on his deeds, and no power
on earth can force him to show them?"

Basset drew in his breath. "If that is so," he said, "it is hard. Very
hard! But to go by night and break into his house--sticks in my
gizzard, sir. I'm sorry, but that is the way I look at it. The man's
here too. I saw him this evening. The fancy might have taken him to
visit the house, and he might have found you there?"

Audley's color faded, he seemed to shrink into himself. "Where did you
see him?" he faltered.

Basset told the story. "I don't suppose that the girls were really in
danger," he continued, "but they thought so, and Audley came to the
rescue and brought them as far as the park gap."

The other took out his silk handkerchief and wiped his brow. "As near
as that," he muttered.

"Ay, and if he had found you at the house, he might have guessed your
purpose."

John Audley held out a hand trembling with passion. "I would have
killed him!" he cried. "I would have killed him--before he should have
had what is there!"

"Exactly," Basset replied. "And that is why I will have nothing to do
with the matter! It's too risky, sir. If you take my advice you will
give it up."

Audley did not answer. He sat awhile, his shoulders bowed, his eyes
fixed on the hearth, while the other wondered for the hundredth time
if he were sane. At length, "What is he doing here?" the old man asked
in a lifeless tone. The passion had died out of him.

"Shooting, I suppose. But there was some talk in Riddsley of his
coming down to stir up old Mottisfont."

"What about?"

"Against the corn-law repeal, I suppose."

Audley nodded. But after a while, "That's a pretext," he said. "And so
is the shooting. He has followed the girl."

Basset started. "Followed Mary!" he exclaimed.

"What else? I have looked for it from the first. I've pressed you to
come to an understanding with her for that reason. Why the devil can't
you? If you leave it much longer you'll be too late! Too late! And, by
G--d, I'll never forgive you!" with a fresh spirt of passion. "Never!
Never, man!"

"I've not said that I meant to do it."

"You've not said!" Audley replied contemptuously. "Do you think that I
don't know that she's all the world to you? Do you think that I've no
eyes? Do you think that when you sit there watching her from behind
your book by the hour together, I have not my sight? Man, I'm not a
fool! And I tell you that if you're not to lose her you must speak!
You must speak! Stand by another month, wait a little longer, and
Philip Audley will put in his oar, and I'll not give that for your
chances!" He snapped his fingers.

"Why should he put in his oar?" Basset asked sullenly. His face had
turned a dull red.

John Audley shrugged his shoulders. "Do you think that she is without
attractions?"

"But Audley lives in another world."

"The more likely to have attractions for her!"

"But surely he'll look for--for something more," Basset stammered.

"For a rich wife? For an alliance, as the saying is? And sleep ill of
nights? And have bad dreams? No, he is no fool, if you are. He sees
that if he marries the girl he makes himself safe. He makes himself
safe! After me, it lies between them."

"I take it that he does think himself safe."

"Not he!" Audley replied. He was stooping over the ashes, warming his
hands, but at that he jumped up. "Not he! he knows better than you!
And fears! And sleeps ill of nights, d--n him! And dreams! But there,
I must not excite myself. I must not excite myself. Only, if he once
begins, he'll be no laggard in love as you are! He'll not sit puling
and peeping and looking at the back of her head by the hour together!
He'll be up and at her--I know what that big jowl means! And she'll be
in his arms in half the time that you've taken to count her
eyelashes!" He turned in a fresh fit of fury and seized his candle.
"In his arms, I tell you, fool, while you are counting her eyelashes.
Well, lose her, lose her, and I never want to see you again, or her!
Never! I'll curse you both!"

He stumbled to the door and went out, a queer, gibbering, shaking
figure; and Basset had no doubt at such moments that he was mad. But
on this occasion he was afraid--he was very much afraid, as he sat
pondering in his chair, that there was method in his madness!




                             CHAPTER XIII

                             PETER PAUPER


The impression which the events of the evening had made on Mary's mind
was still lively when she awoke next day. It was not less clear,
because like the feminine letter of the 'forties, crossed and
recrossed, it had stamped itself in two layers on her mind, of which
the earlier was the more vivid.

The solitude in which her days had of late been spent had left her
peculiarly open to new ideas, while the quiet and wholesome life of
the Gatehouse had prepared her to answer any call which those ideas
might make upon her. Rescued from penury, lifted above anxiety about
bed and board, no longer exposed to the panic-fears which in Paris had
beset even her courageous nature, Mary had for a while been content
simply to rest. She had taken the sunshine, the beauty, the ease and
indolence of her life as a convalescent accepts idleness, without
scruple or question.

But this could not last. She was young, nature soon rallied in her,
and she had seen things and done things during the last two years
which forbade her to accept such a limited horizon as satisfied most
of the women of that day. Unlike them, she had viewed the world from
more than one standpoint; through the grille of a convent school, from
the grimy windows of a back-street in Paris; again, as it moved
beneath the painted ceilings of a French salon. And now, as it
presented itself in this retired house.

Therefore she could not view things as those saw them whose standpoint
had never shifted. She had suffered, she still had twinges--for who,
with her experience, could be sure that the path would continue easy?
And so to her Mr. Colet's sermon had made a strong appeal.

It left the word which Mr. Colet had taken for his text sounding in
her ears. Borne upward on the eloquence which earnestness had lent to
the young preacher, she looked down on a world in torment, a world
holding up piteous hands, craving, itself in ignorance, the help of
those who held the secret, and whose will might make that secret
sufficient to save. Love! To do to others as she would have others do
to her! With every day, with every hour, with every minute to do
something for others! Always to give, never to take! Above all to give
herself, to do her part in that preference of others to self, which
could alone right these mighty wrongs, could find work for the idle,
food for the hungry, roofs for the homeless, knowledge for the blind,
healing for the sick! Which could save all this world in torment, and
could


                 "Build a Heaven in Hell's despair!"


It was a beautiful vision, and in this her first glimpse of it, Mary's
fancy was not chilled by the hard light of experience. It seemed so
plain that if the workman had his master's profit at heart, and the
master were as anxious for the weal of his men, the interests of the
two would be one. Equally plain it seemed that if they who grew the
food aimed at feeding the greatest number, and they who ate had the
same desire to reward the grower, if every man shrank from taking
advantage of other men, if the learned lived to spread their
knowledge, and the strong to help the weak, if no man wronged his
neighbor, but


                  "Each for another gave his ease,"


then it seemed equally plain that love would indeed be lord of all!

Later, she might discover that it takes two to make a bargain; that
charity does bless him who gives but not always him who takes; even,
that cheap bread might be a dear advantage--that at least it might
have its drawbacks.

But for the moment it was enough for Mary that the vision was
beautiful and, as a theory, true. So that, gazing upward at the faded
dimity of her tester, she longed to play her part in it. That world in
torment, those countless hands stretched upward in appeal, that murmur
of infinite pain, the cry of the hungry, of the widow, of men sitting
by tireless hearths, of children dying in mill and mine--the picture
wrought on her so strongly, that she could not rest. She rose, and
though the hoar frost was white on the grass and the fog of an autumn
morning still curtained the view, she began to dress.

Perhaps the chill of the cold water in which she washed sobered her.
At any rate, with the comb in one hand and her hair in the other, she
drifted down another line of thought. Lord Audley--how strange was the
chance which had again brought them together! How much she owed him,
with what kindness had he seen to her comfort, how masterfully had he
arranged matters for her on the boat. And then she smiled. She
recalled Basset's ill-humor, or his--jealousy. At the thought of what
the word implied, Mary colored.

There could be nothing in the notion, yet she probed her own feelings.
Certainly she liked Lord Audley. If he was not handsome, he had that
air of strength and power which impresses women; and he had ease and
charm, and the look of fashion which has its weight with even the most
sensible of her sex. He had all these and he was a man, and she
admired him and was grateful to him. And yesterday she might have
thought that her feeling for him was love.

But this morning she had gained a higher notion of love. She had
learned from Etruria how near to that pattern of love which Mr. Colet
preached the love of man and woman could rise. She had a new
conception of its strength and its power to expel what was selfish or
petty. She had seen it in its noblest form in Etruria, and she knew
that her feeling for Lord Audley was not in the same world with
Etruria's feeling for the curate. She laughed at the notion.

"Poor Etruria!" she meditated. "Or should it be, happy Etruria? Who
knows? I only know that I am heart-whole!"

And she knotted up her hair and, Diana-like, went out into the pure
biting air of the morning, along the green rides hoary with dew and
fringed with bracken, under the oak trees from which the wood-pigeons
broke in startled flight.

But if the energy of her thoughts carried her out, fatigue soon
brought her to a pause. The evening's excitement, the strain of the
adventure had not left her, young as she was, unscathed. The springs
of enthusiasm waned with her strength, and presently she felt jaded.
She perceived that she would have done better had she rested longer;
and too late the charms of bed appealed to her.

She was at the breakfast table when Basset--he, too, had had a
restless night and many thoughts--came down. He saw that she was pale
and that there were shadows under her eyes, and the man's tenderness
went out to her. He longed, he longed above everything to put himself
right with her; and on the impulse of the moment, "I want you to
know," he said, standing meekly at her elbow, "that I am sorry I lost
my temper last evening."

But she was out of sympathy with him. "It is nothing," she said. "We
were all tired, I think. Etruria is not down yet."

"But I want to ask your----"

"Oh dear, dear!" she cried, interrupting him with a gesture of
impatience. "Don't let us rake it up again. If my uncle has not
suffered, there is no harm done. Please let it rest."

But he could not let it rest. He longed to put his neck under her
foot, and he did not see that she was in the worst possible mood for
his purpose. "Still," he said, "you must let me say----"

"Don't!" she cried. She put her hands to her ears. Then, seeing that
she had wounded him, she dropped them and spoke more kindly. "Don't
let us make much of little, Mr. Basset. It was all natural enough. You
don't like Lord Audley----"

"I don't."

"And you did not understand that we had been terribly frightened, and
had good reason to be grateful to him. I am sure that if you had known
that, you would have behaved differently. There!" with a smile. "And
now that I have made the amende for you, let us have breakfast. Here
is your coffee."

He knew that she was holding him off, and all his alarms of the night
were quickened. Again and again had John Audley's warning recurred to
him and as often he had striven to reject it, but always in vain. And
gradually, slowly, it had kindled his resolution, it had fired him to
action. Now, the very modesty which had long kept him silent and
withheld him from enterprise was changed--as so often happens with
diffident man--into rashness. He was as anxious to put his fate to the
test as he had before been unwilling.

Presently, "You will not need to tell your uncle about Lord Audley,"
he said. "I've done it."

"I hope you told him," she answered gravely, "that we were indebted to
Lord Audley for our safety."

"You don't trust me?"

"Don't say things like that!" she cried. "It is foolish. I have no
doubt that in telling my uncle you meant to relieve me. You have
helped me more than once in that way. But----"

"But this is a special occasion?"

She looked at him. "If you wish us to be friends----"

"I don't," he answered roughly. "I don't want to be friends with you."

Then, ambiguous as his words were, she saw where she stood, and she
mustered her presence of mind. She rose from her seat. "And I," she
said, "am not going to quarrel with you, Mr. Basset. I am going now to
learn how Etruria is. And then I shall see my uncle."

She escaped before he could answer.

Once or twice it had crossed her mind that he looked at her with
intention; and once reading that look in his eyes she had felt her
color rise, and her heart beat more quickly. But the absence on her
side of any feeling, except that which a sister might feel for a kind
brother, this and the reserve of his manner had nipped the fancy as
soon as it budded. And if she had given it a second thought, it had
been only to smile at her vanity.

Now she had no doubt of the fact, no doubt that it was jealousy that
moved him, and her uppermost, almost her only feeling was vexation.
Because they had lived in the same house for five months, because he
had been useful and she had been grateful, because they were man and
woman, how foolish it was! How absurd! How annoying! She foresaw from
it many, many, inconveniences; a breach in their pleasant intercourse,
displeasure on her uncle's part, trouble in the house that had been so
peaceful--oh, many things. But that which vexed her most was the fear
that she had, all unwittingly, encouraged him.

She believed that she had not. But while she talked to Etruria, and
later, as she went down the stairs to interview her uncle, she had
this weight on her mind. She strove to recall words and looks, and
upon the whole she was sure that she could acquit herself, sure that
of this evil no part lay at her door. But it was very, very vexatious!

On the threshold of the library she wrested her thoughts back to the
present, and paused a moment, considering what she should say to her
uncle.

She need not have troubled herself, for he was not there. At the first
glance she took the room to be empty; a second showed her Basset. She
turned to retire, but too late; he stepped between her and the door
and closed it. He was a little paler than usual, and his air of
purpose was not to be mistaken.

She stiffened. "I came to see my uncle," she said.

"I am the bearer of a message from him," he answered. "He asked me to
say that he considers the matter at an end. He does not wish it to be
mentioned again. Of course he does not blame you."

"But, Mr. Basset----"

But he would not let her speak. "That was his message," he continued,
"and I am glad to be the messenger because it gives me a chance of
speaking to you. Will you sit down?"

"But we have only just parted," she remonstrated, struggling against
her fate. "I don't understand what you want----"

"To say? No, I am going to explain it--if you will sit down."

She sat down then with the feeling that she was trapped. And since it
was clear that she must go through with it, she was glad that his
insistence hardened her heart and dried up the springs of pity.

He went to the fire, stooped and moved the wood. "You won't come
nearer?" he said.

"No," she replied. How foolish to trap her like this if he thought to
get anything from her!

He turned to her and his face was changed. Under his wistful look she
discovered that it was not so easy to be hard, not so easy to maintain
her firmness. "You would rather escape?" he said, reading her mind. "I
know. But I can't let you escape. You are thinking that I have trapped
you? And you are fearing that I am going to make you unhappy for--for
half an hour perhaps? I know. And I am fearing that you are going to
make me unhappy for--always."

No, she could not retain her hardness. She knew that she was going to
feel pity after all. But she would not speak.

"I have only hope," he went on. "There is only one thing I am clinging
to. I have read that when a man loves a woman very truly, very deeply,
as I love you, Mary"--she started violently, and blushed to the roots
of her hair, so sudden was the avowal--"as I love you," he repeated
sorrowfully, "I have read that she either hates him or loves him. His
love is a fire that either warms her or scorches her, draws her or
repels her. I thought of that last night, as I thought of many things,
and I was sure, I was confident that you did not hate me."

"Oh no," she answered, unsteadily. "Indeed, indeed, I don't! I am very
grateful to you. But the other--I don't think it is true."

"No?" he said, keeping his eyes on her face. "And then, you don't
doubt that I love you?"

"No." The flush had faded from her face and left her pale. "I don't
doubt that--now."

"It is so true that--you know that you have sometimes called me Peter?
Well, I would have given much, very much to call you Mary. But I did
not dare. I could not. For I knew that if I did, only once, my voice
would betray me, and that I should alarm you before the time! I knew
that that one word--that word alone--would set my heart upon my sleeve
for all to see. And I did not want to alarm you. I did not want to
hurry you. I thought then that I had time, time to make myself known
to you, time to prove my devotion, time to win you, Mary. I thought
that I could wait. Now, since last night, I am afraid to wait. I
doubt, nay I am sure, that I have no time, that I dare not wait."

She did not answer, but the color mounted again to her face.

He turned and knocked the fire together with his foot. Then he took a
step towards her. "Tell me," he said, "have I any chance? Any chance
at all, Mary?"

She shook her head; but seeing then that he kept his eyes fixed on her
and would not take that for an answer, "None," she said as kindly as
she could. "I must tell you the truth. It is useless to try to break
it. I have never once, not once thought of you but as a friend,
Peter."

"But now," he said, "cannot you regard me differently--now! Now that
you know? Cannot you begin to think of me as--a lover?"

"No," Mary said frankly and pitifully. "I should not be honest if I
said that I could. If I held out hopes. You have been always good to
me, kind to me, a dear friend, a brother when I had need of one. And I
am grateful, Mr. Basset, honestly, really grateful to you. And fond of
you--in that way. But I could not think of you in the way you desire.
I know it for certain. I know that there is no chance."

He stood for a moment without speaking, and seeing how stricken he
looked, how sad his face, her eyes filled with tears. Then, "Is there
any one else?" he asked slowly, his eyes on her face.

She did not answer. She rose to her feet.

"Is there any one else?" he repeated, a new note in his voice. He
moved forward a step.

"You have no right to ask that," she said.

"I have every right," he replied. "What?" he continued, moving still
nearer to her, his whole bearing changed in a moment by the sting of
jealousy. "I am condemned, I am rejected, and I am not to ask why?"

"No," she said.

"But I do ask!" he retorted with a passion which surprised and alarmed
her; he was no longer the despondent lover of five minutes before, but
a man demanding his rights. "Have you no heart? Have you no feeling
for me? Do you not consider what this is to me?"

"I consider," Mary replied with a warmth almost equal to his own,
"that if I answered your question I should humiliate myself. No one,
no one has a right, sir, to ask that question. And least of all you!"

"And I am to be cast aside, I am to be discarded without a reason?"

That word "discarded" seemed so unjust, and so uncalled for, seeing
that she had given him no encouragement, that it stung her to anger.
"Without a reason?" she retorted. "I have given you a reason--I do not
return your love. That is the only reason that you have a right to
know. But if you press me, I will tell you why what you propose is
impossible. Because, if I ever love a man I hope, Mr. Basset, that it
will be one who has some work in the world, something to do that shall
be worth the doing, a man with ambitions above mere trifling, mere
groping in the dust of the past for facts that, when known, make no
man happier, and no man better, and scarce a man wiser! Do you ever
think," she continued, carried away by the remembrance of Mr. Colet's
zeal, "of the sorrow and pain that are in the world? Of the vast
riddles that are to be solved? Of the work that awaits the wisest and
the strongest, and at which all in their degree can help? My uncle is
an old man, it is well he should play with the past. I am a girl, it
may serve for me. But what do you here?" She pointed to his table,
laden with open folios and calf-bound volumes. "You spend a week in
proving a Bohun marriage that is nothing to any one. Another, in
raking up a blot that is better forgotten! A third in tracing to its
source some ancient tag! You move a thousand books--to make one
knight! Is that a man's work?"

"At least," he said huskily, "I do no harm."

"No harm?" Mary replied, swept away by her feelings. "Is that enough?
Because in this quiet corner, which is home to my uncle and a refuge
to me, no call reaches you, is it enough that you do no harm? Is there
no good to be done? Think, Mr. Basset! I am ignorant, a woman. But I
know that to-day there are great questions calling for an answer,
wrongs clamoring to be righted, a people in travail that pleads for
ease! I know that there is work in England for men, for all! Work,
that if there be any virtue left in ancient blood should summon you as
with a trumpet call!"

He did not answer. Twice, early in her attack he had moved as if he
would defend himself. Then he had let his chin fall and he had
listened with his eyes on the table. And--but she had not seen it--he
had more than once shivered under her words as under a lash. For he
loved her and she scourged him. He loved her, he desired her, he had
put her on a pedestal, and all the time she had been viewing him with
the clear merciless eyes of youth, trying him by the standard of her
dreams, probing his small pretensions, finding him a potterer in a
library--he who in his vanity had raised his eyes to her and sought to
be her hero!

It was a cruel lesson, cruelly given; and it wounded him to the heart.
So that she, seeing too late that he made no reply, seeing the
grayness of his face, and that he did not raise his eyes, had a
too-late perception of what she had done, of how cruel she had been,
of how much more she had said than she had meant to say. She stood
conscience-stricken, remorseful, ashamed.

And then, "Oh, I am sorry!" she cried. "I am sorry! I should not have
said that! You meant to honor me and I have hurt you."

He looked up then, but neither the shadow nor the grayness left his
face. "Perhaps it was best," he said dully. "I am sure that you meant
well."

"I did," she cried. "I did! But I was wrong. Utterly wrong!"

"No," he said, "you were not wrong. The truth was best."

"But perhaps it was not the truth," she replied, anxious at once,
miserably anxious to undo what she had done, to unsay what she had
said, to tell him that she was conceited, foolish, a mere girl! "I am
no judge--after all what do I know of these things? What have I done
that I should say anything?"

"I am afraid that what is said is said," he replied. "I have always
known that I was no knight-errant. I have never been bold until
to-day--and it has not answered," with a sickly smile. "But we
understand one another now--and I relieve you."

He passed her on his way to the door, and she thought that he was
going to hold it open for her to go out. But when he reached the door
he fumbled for the handle, found it as a blind man might find it, and
went out himself, without turning his head.




                             CHAPTER XIV

                          THE MANCHESTER MEN


Basset knew every path that crossed the Chase, and had traversed them
at all seasons, and in all weathers. But when, some hours later, he
halted on a scarred and blackened waste that stretched to the horizon
on every side, he would have been hard put to it to say how he came to
be there. He wore his hat, he carried his stick, but he could not
remember how he had become possessed of either.

For a time the shock of disappointment, the numbing sense of loss had
dulled his mind. He had walked as in a dream, repeating over and over
again that that was what she thought of him--and he had loved her. It
was possible that in the interval he had sworn at fate, or shrieked
against the curlews, or cursed the inhuman sky that mocked him with
its sameness. But he did not think that he had. He felt the life in
him too low for such outbursts. He told himself that he was a poor
creature, a broken thing, a failure. He loved her, and--and that was
what she thought of him.

He sat on the stump of an ancient thorn-tree that had been a landmark
on the burnt heath longer than the oldest man could remember, and he
began to put together what she had said. He was trifling away his
life, picking stray finds from the dust-heap of the past, making no
man wiser and no man better, doing nothing for any one! Was she right?
The Bohun pedigree, at which he had worked so long? He had been proud
of his knowledge of Norman descents, proud of the research which had
won that knowledge, proud of his taste for following up recondite
facts. Were the knowledge, the research, the taste, all things for
which he ought to blush? Certainly, tried by the test, _cui bono?_
they came off but poorly. And perhaps, to sit down at his age, content
with such employments, might seem unworthy and beneath him, if there
were other calls upon him. But were there other calls?

Time had been when his family had played a great part, not in
Staffordshire only but in England; and then doubtless public service
had been a tradition with them. But the tradition had waned with their
fortunes. In these days he was only a small squire, a little more
regarded than the new men about him; but with no ability to push his
way in a crowd, no mastery among his fellow-men, one whom character
and position alike cast for a silent part.

Of course she knew none of these things, but with the enthusiasm of
youth she looked to find in every man the qualities of the leading
role. He who seldom raised his voice at Quarter Sessions or on the
Grand Jury--to which his birth rather than his possessions called
him--she would have had him figure among the great, lead causes,
champion the oppressed! It was pitiful, if it had not been absurd!

He walked on by and by, dwelling on the pity of it, a very unhappy
man. He thought of the evenings in the library when she had looked
over his shoulder, and one lamp had lighted them; of the mornings when
the sun had gilded her hair as she bent over the task she was even
then criticizing; of afternoons when the spirit of the chase had been
theirs, and the sunshine and the flowers had had no charm strong
enough to draw them from the pursuit of--alas! something that could
make no man better or wiser. He had lost her; and if aught mattered
apart from that, she had for ever poisoned the springs of content,
muddied the wells of his ordered life.

Beyond doubt she loved the other, for had she not, she would have
viewed things differently. Beyond doubt in her love for the other lay
the bias that weighted her strictures. And yet, making all allowance
for that, there was so much of truth in what she had said, so much
that hit the mark, that he could never be the same again, never give
himself with pleasure to his former pursuits, never find the old life
a thing to satisfy!

And still, like the tolling of a death bell above the city's life, two
thoughts beat on his mind again and again, and gave him intolerable
pain. That was what she thought of him! And he had lost her! That was
what she thought of him! And he had lost her! Her slender gracious
figure, her smiling eyes, the glint in her hair, her goodness, her
very self--all were for another! All were lost to him!

Presently the day began to draw in, and fagged and hopeless he turned
and began to make his way back. His road lay through Brown Heath, the
mining village, where in all the taverns and low-browed shops they
were beginning to light their candles. He crossed the Triangle, and
made his way along the lane, deep in coal-dust and foul with drains,
that ran upwards to the Chase. A pit, near at hand, had just turned
out its shift, and in the dusk tired men, swinging tins in their
hands, were moving by twos and threes along the track. With his bent
shoulders and weary gait he was lost among them, he walked one with
them; yet here and there an older man espied the difference,
recognized him, and greeted him with rough respect. Presently the
current slackened; something, he could not see what, dammed the
stream. A shrewish voice rose in the darkness before him, and other
voices, angry, clamant, protesting, struck in. A few of the men pushed
by the trouble, others stood, here and there a man added a taunt to
the brawl. In his turn Basset came abreast of the quarrel. He halted.

A farm cart blocked the roadway. Over the tail hung three or four
wailing children; into it a couple of sturdy men were trying to lift
an old woman, seated in a chair. A dingy beadle and a constable, who
formed the escort and looked ill at ease, stood beside the cart, and
round it half a score of slatternly women pushed and shrieked and
gesticulated. On the group and the whole dreary scene nightfall cast a
pallid light.

"What is it?" Basset asked.

"They're shifting Nan Oates to the poorhouse," a man answered. "Her
son died of the fever, and there's none to keep her or the little uns.
She've done till now, but they'll not give her bite nor sup out of the
House--that's the law now't seems. So the House it be!"

"Her'd rather die than go!" cried a girl.

"D--n them and their Bastilles!" exclaimed a younger man. "Are we free
men, or are we not?"

"Free men?" shrieked a woman, who had seized the horse's rein and was
loudest in her outcry. "No, nor Staffordshire men, nor Englishmen, nor
men at all, if you let an old woman that's always lived decent go to
their stone jug this way. Give me Stafford Gaol--'tis miles afore it!"

"Ay, you're at home there, Bet!" a voice in the crowd struck in, and
the laugh that followed lightened matters.

Basset looked with pity at the old woman. Her head sunk upon her
breast, her thin shawl tucked about her shoulders, her gray hair in
wisps on her cheeks, she gazed in tearless grief upon the hovel which
had been home to her. "Who's to support her," he asked, "if she
stays?"

"For the bite and sup there's neighbors," a man answered. "Reverend
Colet he said he might do something. But he's been lammed. And there's
the rent. The boy's ten, and he made four shilling a week in the pit,
but the new law's stopped the young uns working."

"Ay, d--n all new laws!" cried another. "Poor laws and pit laws we're
none but the worse for them!"

The men were preparing to move the cart. The woman who held the rein
clung to it. "Now, Bet, have a care!" said the constable. "Or you'll
go home by Weeping Cross again!"

"Cross? I'll cross you!" the termagant retorted. "Selling up widows'
houses is your bread and meat! May the devil, hoof and horn, with his
scythe on his back, go through you! If there were three men here, ay,
men as you'd call men----"

"Easy, woman, easy!"

"Woman, dang you! You call me woman----"

"Now, let go, Bet! You'll be in trouble else!" some one said.

But she held on, and the crowd were beginning to jostle the men in
charge when Basset stepped forward. "Steady, a moment," he said. "Will
the guardians let the woman stop if the rent is provided?"

"Who be you, master?" the constable asked. "You'd best let us do our
duty."

"Dang it, man," an old fellow interposed, "it's Squire Basset of
Blore. Dunno you know him? Keep a civil tongue in your head, will
you!"

"Ay," chimed in another, pushing forward with a menacing gesture. "You
be careful, Jack! You be Jack in office, but 'twon't always be so!
'Twon't always be so!"

"Mr. Colet knows the old woman?" Basset asked.

"Sure, sir, the curate knows her."

"Well, I'll find the rent," Basset said, addressing the constable, "if
you'll let her be. I'll see the overseer about her in the morning."

"So long as she don't come on the rates, sir?"

"She'll not come on the rates for six months," Basset said. "I'll be
answerable for so much."

The men had little stomach for their task, and with a good excuse they
were willing enough to desist. A woman fetched a stub of a pen and a
drop of ink and Basset wrote a word for their satisfaction. While he
did so, "O'd Staffordshire! O'd Staffordshire!" a man explained in the
background. "Bassets of Blore--they be come from an Abbey and come to
a Grange, as the saying is. You never heard of the Bassets of Blore,
you be neither from Mixen nor Moor!" In old Stafford talk the rich
lands of Cheshire stood for the "mixen" as against the bare heaths of
the home county.

In five minutes the business was done, the woman freed, and Basset was
trudging away through the gathering darkness. But the incident had
done him good. It had lightened his heart. It had changed ever so
little the direction of his thoughts. Out of his own trouble he had
stretched a hand to another; and although he knew that it was not by
stray acts such as this that he could lift himself to Mary's standard,
though the battle over the new Poor Law had taught him, and many
others, that charity may be the greatest of evils, what he had done
seemed to bring him nearer to her. A hardship of the poor, which he
might have seen with blind eyes, or viewed from afar as the inevitable
result of the stay of outdoor relief, had come home to him. As he
plodded across the moor he carried with him a picture of the old woman
with her gray hair falling about her wrinkled face, and her hands
clasped in hopeless resignation. And he felt that his was not the only
trouble in the world.

When he had passed the wall of Beaudelays Park, Basset struck--not far
from the Gatehouse--into the road leading down to the Vale, and a
couple of hours after dark he plodded into Riddsley. He made for the
Audley Arms, a long straggling house on the main street, in one part
of two stories, in another of three, with a big bay window at the end.
Entering the yard by the archway he ordered a gig to go to the
Gatehouse for his portmanteau. Then he turned into the inn, and
scribbled a note to John Audley, stating that he was called away, and
would explain matters when he wrote again. He sent it by the driver.

It was eight o'clock. "I am afraid, Squire," the landlord said, "that
there's no fire upstairs. If you'd not mind our parlor for once,
there's no one there and it's snug and warm."

"I'll do that, Musters," he said. He was cold and famished and he was
not sorry to avoid the company of his own thoughts. In the parlor,
next door to the Snug, he might be alone or listen to the local gossip
as he pleased.

Ten minutes later he sat in front of a good plain meal, and for the
time the pangs of appetite overcame those of disappointment. About
nine the landlord entered on some errand. "I suppose, sir," he said,
lingering to see that his guest had all that he wanted, "you've heard
this about Mr. Mottisfont?"

"No, Musters, what is it? Get a clean glass and tell me about it."

"He's to resign, sir, I hear. And his son is to stand."

"Why?"

"Along o' this about Sir Robert Peel, I understand. They have it that
Sir Robert's going to repeal the corn taxes--some say that he's been
for it all through, and some talk about a potato failure. Mr.
Mottisfont sees that that'll never do for Riddsley, but he don't want
to part from his leader, after following him all these years; so he'll
go out and the young gentleman will take his place."

"Do you think it is true about Peel?"

"They're saying it, and Mr. Stubbs, he believes it. But it'll never go
down in Riddsley, Squire. We're horn and corn men here, two to one of
us. There's just the two small factories on the other side, and most
of the hands haven't votes. But here's Mr. Stubbs himself."

The lawyer had looked into the room in passing. Seeing Basset he
removed his hat. "Pardon, Squire," he said. "I did not know that you
were here."

"Not at all," Basset answered. He knew the lawyer locally, and had
seen him often--at arm's length--in the peerage suit. "Will you take a
glass of wine with me?"

Stubbs said that he would with pleasure, if he might take it
standing--his time was short. The landlord was for withdrawing, but
Stubbs detained him. "No, John, with Mr. Basset's leave I've a bone to
pick with you," he said. "Who are these men who are staying here?"

Musters's face fell. "Lord, Mr. Stubbs," he said, "have you heard of
them?"

"I hear most things," the lawyer answered. "But repealers talking
treason at the Audley Arms is a thing I never thought to hear. They
must go."

The landlord rubbed his head. "I can't turn 'em out," he said. "They'd
have the law of me. His lordship couldn't turn 'em out."

"I don't know about that," Stubbs replied. "He's a good landlord, but
he likes his own way."

"But what can I do?" the stout man protested. "When they came I knew
no more about them than a china babe. When they began to talk, so glib
that no one could answer them, I was more took aback than anybody.
Seems like the world's coming to an end with Manchester men coming
here."

"Perhaps it is," Basset said.

Stubbs met his eye and took his meaning. Later the lawyer maintained
that he had his suspicions from that moment. At the time he only
answered, "Not in our day, Mr. Basset. Peel or Repeal, there's no one
has attacked the land yet but the land has broken them. And so it will
be this time. John, the sooner those two are out of your house the
better."

"But, dang me, sir, what am I to do?"

"Put 'em in the horse trough for what I care!" the lawyer replied.
"Good-evening, Squire. I hope the Riddsley parliament mayn't disturb
you."

The landlord followed him out, after handing something through the
hatch, which opened into the Snug. He left the hatch a little ajar
when he had done so, and the voices of those who gathered there
nightly, as to a club, reached Basset. At first he caught no more than
a word here or there, but as the debate grew warm the speakers raised
their voices.

"All mighty fine," some one said, laying down the law, "but you're
like the rest, you Manchester chaps. You've your eyes on your own rack
and manger!"

"I'm not denying it," came the answer in a Lancashire accent, "I'm not
saying that cheap bread won't suit us. But it isn't for that----"

"No, no, of course not," the former speaker replied with heavy
irony--Basset thought that the voice belonged to Hayward of the
Leasows, a pompous old farmer, dubbed behind his back "The Duke." "You
don't want low wages i' your mills, of course!"

"Cheap bread doesn't make low wages," the other rejoined. "That's
where you mistake, sir. Let me put it to you. You've known wheat
high?"

"It was seventy-seven shillings seven years back," the farmer
pronounced. "And I ha' known it a hundred shillings a quarter for
three years together."

"And I suppose the wages at that time were the highest you've ever
known?"

"Well, no," the farmer admitted, "I'm not saying that."

"And seven years ago when wheat was seventy-seven--it is fifty-six
now--were wages higher then than now?"

"Well," the Duke answered reluctantly, "I don't know as they were,
mister, not to take notice of."

"Think it out for yourself, sir," the other replied. "I don't think
you'll find that wages are highest when wheat is highest, nor lowest
when wheat is lowest."

The farmer, more weighty than ready, snorted. But another speaker took
up the cudgels. "Ay, but one minute," he said. "It's the price of
wheat fixes the lowest wages. If it's two pound of bread will keep a
man fit to work--just keep him so and no more--it's the price of bread
fixes whether the lowest wages is eightpence a day or a shilling a
day."

"Well, but----"

"Well, but by G--d, he's got you there!" the Duke cried, and smacked
his fat thigh in triumph. "We've some sense i' Riddsley yet. Here's
your health and song, Dr. Pepper!" At which there was some laughter.

"Well, sir, I'll not say yes, nor no, to that," the Lancashire man
replied, as soon as he could get a hearing. "But, gentlemen, it's not
low wages we want. I'll tell you the two things we do want, and why we
want cheap bread; first, that your laborers after they have bought
bread may have something over to buy our woollens, and our cottons,
and your pots. And secondly, if we don't take foreign wheat in payment
how are foreigners to pay for our goods?"

But at this half a dozen were up in arms. "How?" cried the Duke, "why
wi' money like honest men at home! But there it is! There's the
devil's hoof! It's foreign corn you're after! And with foreign corn
coming in at forty shillings where'll we be?"

"No wheat will ever be grown at that price," declared the free trader
with solemnity, "here or abroad!"

"So you say!" cried Hayward. "But put it at forty-five. We'll be on
the rates, and our laborers, where'll they be?"

"I don't like such talk in my house!" said Musters.

"I'd certainly like an answer to that," Pepper the surgeon said. "If
the farmers are broke where'll their laborers be but flocking to your
mills to put down wages there!"

"The laborers? Well, they're protected now, that's true."

"Lucky for them!" cried two or three.

"They are protected now," the stranger repeated slowly. "And I'll tell
you what one of them said to me last year. 'I be protected,' he said,
'and I be starving!'"

"Dang his impudence!" muttered old Hayward. "That's the kind of thing
they two Boshams at the Bridge talk. Firebrands they be!"

But the shot had told; no one else spoke.

"That man's wages," the Manchester man continued, "were six shillings
a week--it was in Wiltshire. And you are protected too, sir," he
continued, turning suddenly on the Duke. "Have you made a fortune,
sir, farming?"

"I don't know as I have," the farmer answered sulkily--and in a lower
voice, "Dang his impudence again!"

"Why not? Because you are paying a protected rent. Because you pay
high for feeding-stuff. Because you pay poor-rates so high you'd be
better off paying double wages. There's only one man benefits by the
