Princess. And now walking with his lordship as if she had known him
all her life! What would Mr. John say? D'you see how gay he looks! Not
a bit what he is when he speaks to us! Wonder whether there's anything
in it!" And so on, and so on, with tit-bits from the history of Mary's
father, and choice eccentricities from the life of John Audley.

Mrs. Jenkinson's amazement, as she espied them coming up the path to
the house, was a thing by itself. It was such that she set her door
ajar that she might see them pass through the hall. She was all of a
twitter, she said afterwards. And poor Jane and poor Sarah--who were
out! What a miss they were having! It was not thrice in the twelve
months that his lordship brought a lady to the house.

A greater miss, indeed, it turned out, than she thought. For to her
gratification Lord Audley tapped at her door. He pushed it open. "Mrs.
Jenkinson," he said pleasantly, "this is my cousin, Miss Audley, who
is good enough to take a cup of your excellent tea with me, if you
will make it. She has walked in from the Gatehouse."

Mrs. Jenkinson was a combination of an eager, bright-eyed bird and a
stout, short lady in dove-colored silk--if such a thing can be
imagined; and the soul of good-nature. She took Mary by both hands,
beamed upon her, and figuratively took her to her bosom. "A little
cake and wine, my dear," she chirruped. "After a long walk! And then
tea. To be sure, my dear! I knew your father, Mr. Peter Audley, a
dear, good gentleman. You would like to wash your hands? Yes, my dear!
Not that you are not--and his lordship will wait for us upstairs. Yes,
there's a step. I knew your father, to be sure, to be sure. A new
brush, my dear. And now will you let me--not that your sweet face
needs any ornament! Yes, I talk too much--but, there, my love, when
you are as old----"

She was a simple soul, and because her tongue rarely stopped she might
have been thought to see nothing. But women, unlike men, can do two
things at once, and little escaped her twinkling spectacles. As she
told her sister later, "My dear, I saw it was spoons from the first.
She sparkled all over, bless her innocent heart! And he, if she had
been a duchess, could not have waited on her more elegant--well,
elegantly, Sally, if you like, but we can't all talk like you. They
thought, the dear creatures, that I saw nothing; but once he said
something too low for me to hear and she looked up at him, and her
pretty eyes were like stars. And he looked--well, Sally, I could not
tell you how he looked!"

"I am not sure that it would be proper," the spinster demurred.

"Ah, well, it was as pretty a thing as you'd wish to see," the good
creature ran on, drumming with her fingers on the lap of her silk
gown. "And she, bless her, I dare say she was all of a twitter, but
she didn't show it. No airs or graces either--but there, an Audley has
no need! Why, God bless me, I said something about the Princess and
what company she must have seen, and what a change for her, and she up
and said--I am sure I loved her for it!--that she had been no more
than a governess! My dear, an Audley a governess! I fancied my lord
wasn't quite pleased, and very natural! But when a man is spoons----"

"My dear sister!"

"Vulgar? Well, perhaps so, I know I run on, but gentle or simple,
they're the same when they're in love! And Jane will be glad to hear
that she took two pieces of the sultana and two cups of tea, and he
watching every piece she put in her mouth, and she coloring up, once
or twice, so that it did my heart good to see them, the pretty dears.
Jane will be pleased. And there might have been nothing but seed cake
in the house. I shall remember more presently, but I was in such a
twitter!"

"What did she call him?" Miss Sarah asked.

"To be sure, my dear, that was what I was going to tell you! I
listened, and not a single thing did she call him. But once, when he
gave her some cake, I heard him call her Mary, for all the world as if
it was a bit of sugar in his mouth. And there came a kind of quiver
over her pretty face, and she looked at her plate as much as to say it
was a new thing. And I said to myself 'Philip and Mary'--out of the
old school-books you know, but who they were I don't remember. But
it's my opinion," Mrs. Jenkinson continued, rubbing her nose with the
end of her spectacles, "that he had spoken just before they came in,
Sally."

"You don't say so?" Sarah cried.

"If you ask me, there was a kind of softness about them both! Law,
when I think what you and Jane missed through going to that stupid
Institute! I am sure you'll never forgive yourselves!"

The good lady had not missed much herself, but she was mistaken in
thinking that the two had come to an understanding. Indeed when,
leaving the warmth of her presence behind them, they drove out of
town, with the servant seated with folded arms behind them and Mary
snugly tucked in beside my lord, a new constraint began to separate
them. The excitement of the meeting had waned, the fillip of the
unwonted treat had lost its power. A depression for which she could
not account beset Mary as they rolled through the dull outskirts and
faced the flat mistridden pastures and the long lines of willows. On
his side doubt held him silent. He had found it pleasant to come to
the brink, he had not been blind to Mary's smiles and her rare
blushes. But the one step farther--that could not be re-trodden, and
it was in the nature of the man to hesitate at the last, and to
consider if he were getting full value.

So, as they drove through the dusk, now noiselessly over sodden
leaves, now drumming along the hard road, the hint of a chill fell
between them. Mary's thoughts went forward to the silent house and the
lonely rooms, and she chid herself for ingratitude. She had had her
pleasure, she had had an unwonted treat. What was wrong with her? What
more did she want?

It was nearly dark, and not many words had passed when Lord Audley
pulled up the horses at the old Cross. The man leapt down and was
going to help Mary to alight, when his master bade him take the
box-seat and the reins.

Mary remonstrated. "Oh, don't get down, please!" she cried. "Please!
It is nothing to the house from here."

"It is half a mile if it is a yard," he said. "And it is nearly dark.
I am going with you." He bade the man walk the horses up and down.

She ventured another protest, but he put it aside. He threw back the
rug and lifted her down. For a moment he stamped about and stretched
himself. Then "Come, Mary," he said. It was an order.

She knew then what was at hand. And though she had a minute before
looked forward with regret to the parting, all her thought now was how
she might escape to the Gatehouse. It became a refuge. Her heart, as
she started to walk beside him, beat so quickly that she could not
speak. She was thankful that it was dark, and that he could not read
her agitation in her face.

He did not speak himself for some minutes. Then "Mary," he said
abruptly, looking straight before him, "I am rather one for taking
than asking, and that stands in my way now. When I've wanted a thing
I've generally taken it. Now I want a thing I can't take--without
asking. And I feel that I'm not good at the asking. But I want it
badly, and I must do the best I can. I love you, Mary. I love you, and
I want you for my wife."

She could not find a word. When he went on his tone was lower.

"I'm rather a lonely man," he said. "You didn't know that, or think
it? But it is true. And such an hour as we have spent to-day is not
mine often. It lies with you to say if I am going to have more of
them. I might tell you with truth that I haven't much to offer my
wife. That if I am Audley of Beaudelays, I am the poorest Audley that
ever was. That my wife will be no great lady, and will step into no
golden shoes. The butterflies are moths, Mary, nowadays, and if I am
ever to be much she will have to help me. But I will tell no lies, my
dear!" He turned to her then and stopped; and perforce, though her
knees trembled, she had to stand also, and face him as he looked down
at her. "I am not going to pretend that what I have to offer isn't
enough. For you are lonely like me; you have no one but John Audley to
look to, and I am big enough and strong enough to take care of you.
And I will take care of you--if you will let me. If you will say the
word, Mary?"

He loomed above her in the darkness. He seemed already to possess her.
She tried to think, tried to ask herself if she loved him, if she
loved him enough; but the fancy for him which she had had from the
beginning, that and his masterfulness swept her irresistibly towards
him. She was lonely--more lonely than ever of late, and to whom was
she to look? Who else had been as good to her, as kind to her, as
thoughtful for her, as he who now wooed her so honestly, who offered
her all he had to offer? She hesitated, and he saw that she hesitated.

"Come, we've got to have this out," he said bluntly. And he put his
hand on her shoulder. "We stand alone, both of us, you and I. We're
the last of the old line, and I want you for my wife, Mary! With you I
can do something, with you I believe that I can make something of my
life! Without you--but there, if you say no, I won't take it! I won't
take it, and I am going to have you, if not to-day, to-morrow, and if
not to-morrow, the next day! Make no mistake about that!"

She tried to fence with him. "I have not a penny," she faltered.

"I don't ask you for a penny."

Her instinct was still to escape. "You are Lord Audley," she said,
"and I am a poor relation. Won't you--don't you think that you will
repent presently!"

"That's my business! If that be all--if there's no one else----"

"No, there's no one else," she admitted. "But----"

"_But_ be hanged!" he cried. "If there's no one else you are mine."
And he passed his arm round her.

For a moment she stepped back. "No!" she protested, raising her hands
to push him off. "Please--please let me think."

He let her be, for already he knew that he had won; and perhaps in his
own mind he was beginning to doubt the wisdom of the step. "My uncle?
Have you thought of him?" she asked. "What will he say?"

"I have not thought of him," he cried grandly, "and I am not going to
think of him. I am thinking, my dear, only of you. Do you love me?"

She stood silent, gazing at him.

"Don't play with me!" he said. "I've a right to an answer."

"I think I do," she said softly. "Yes--I think--no, wait; that is not
all."

"It is all."

"No," between laughing and crying. "You are not giving me time. I want
to think. You are carrying me by storm, sir."

"And a good way, too!" he rejoined. Then she did let him take her, and
for a few seconds she was in his arms. He crushed her to him, she felt
all the world turning. But before he found her lips, the crack of a
whip startled them, the creak of a wheel sliding round the corner
warned them, she slipped from his arms.

"You little wretch!" he said.

Breathless, hardly knowing what she felt, or what storm shook her, she
could not speak. The wagon came creaking past them, the driver
clinging to the chain of the slipper. When it was gone by she found
her voice. "It shall be as you will," she said, and her tone thrilled
him. "But I want to think. It has been so sudden, I am frightened. I
am frightened, and--yes, I think I am happy. But please to let me go
now. I am safe here--in two minutes I shall be at home."

He tried to keep her, but "Let me go now," she pleaded. "Later it
shall be as you wish--always as you wish. But let me go now."

He gave way then. He said a few words while he held her hands, and he
said them very well. Then he let her go. Before the dusk hid her she
turned and waved her hand, and he waved his. He stood, listening. He
heard the sound of her footsteps grow fainter and fainter as she
climbed the hill, until they were lost in the rustle of the wind
through the undergrowth. At last he turned and trudged down the hill.

"Well, I've done it," he muttered presently. "And Uncle John may find
what he likes, damn him! After all, she's handsome enough to turn any
man's head, and it makes me safe! But I'll go slow. I'll go slow now.
There's no hurry."




                            CHAPTER XXIII

                          BLORE UNDER WEAVER


Gratitude and liking, and the worship of strength which is as natural
in a woman as the worship of beauty in a man, form no bad imitation of
love, and often pass into love as imperceptibly as the brook becomes a
river. The morning light brought Mary no repentance. Misgivings she
had, as what lover has not, were the truth told. Was her love as
perfect as Etruria's, as unselfish, as absorbing? She doubted. But in
all honesty she hoped that it might become so; and when she dwelt on
the man who had done so much for her, and thought so well for her, who
had so much to offer and made so little of the offering, her heart
swelled with gratitude, and if she did not love she fancied that she
did.

So much was changed for her! She had wondered more than once what
would happen to her, if her uncle died. That fear was put from her.
Toft--she had been vexed with Toft. How small a matter that seemed
now! And Peter Basset? He had been kind to her, and a pang did pierce
her heart on his account. But he had recovered very quickly, she
reflected. He had shown himself cold enough and distant enough at his
last visit! And then she smiled as she thought how differently her new
lover had assailed her, with what force, what arrogance, what
insistence--and yet with a force and arrogance and insistence to which
it was pleasant to yield.

She did not with all this forget that she would be Lady Audley, she,
whose past had been so precarious, whose prospects had been so dark,
whose fate it might have been to travel through life an obscure
teacher! She had not been woman if she had not thought of this; nor if
she had failed, when she thought of it, to breathe a prayer for the
gallant lover who had found her and saved her, and had held it enough
that she was an Audley. He might have chosen far and wide. He had
chosen her.

No wonder that Mrs. Toft saw a change in her. "Law, Miss," she
remarked, when she came in to remove the breakfast. "One would think a
ten-mile walk was the making of you! It's put a color into your cheeks
that would shame a June rose! And to be sure," with a glance at the
young lady's plate, "not much eaten either!"

"I am not hungry, Mrs. Toft," Mary said meekly. "I drove back to the
foot of the hill."

"And I'd like to sort Toft for it! Ifs he who should have gone! He's
upstairs now, keeping out of my way, and that grim and gray you'd
think he'd seen a ghost! And 'Truria, silly girl, she's all of a
quiver this morning. It's 'Mother, let me do this!' and 'Mother, I'll
do that!' all because her reverend--not, as I tell her, that aught
will ever come of it--has got a roof over his head at last."

"But that's good news! Has Mr. Colet got some work?"

"Not he, the silly man! Nor likely! There's mighty little work for
them as go against the gentry. For what he's got he's to thank Mr.
Basset."

"Mr. Basset."

"To be sure," Mrs. Toft answered, with a covert glance at the girl,
"why not, Miss? Some talk and the wind goes by. There's plenty of
those. And some say naught but do--and that's Mr. Basset. He's took in
Mr. Colet till he can find a church. Etruria's that up about it, I
tell her, smile before breakfast and sweat before night. And so she'll
find it, I warrant!"

"It is very good of Mr. Basset," Mary said gravely. And then, "Is that
some one knocking, Mrs. Toft?"

"It's well to have young ears!" Mrs. Toft took out the tray, and
returned with a letter. "It's for you, Miss," she said. "The postman's
late this morning, but cheap's a slow traveller. When a letter was a
letter and cost ninepence it came to hand like a gentleman!"

Mary waited to hear no more. She knew the handwriting, and as quickly
as she could she escaped from the room. No one with any claim to taste
used an envelope in those days, and to open a letter so that no rent
might mar its fairness called for a care which she could not exercise
in public.

Alone, in her room, she opened it, and her eyes grew serious as they
travelled down the page, which bore signs of haste.


"Sweetheart," it began, and she thought that charming, "I do not ask
if you reached the Gatehouse safely, for I listened and I must have
heard, if harm befel you. I drove home as happy as a king, and grieved
only that I had not had that of you which I had a right to have--damn
that carter! This troubles me the more as I shall not see you again
for a time, and if this does not disappoint you too, you're a
deceiver! My plans are altered by to-day's news that Peel returns to
office. In any event, I had to go to Seabourne's for Christmas, now I
must be there for a meeting to-morrow and go from there to London on
the same business. You would not have me desert my post, I am sure?
Heaven knows how long I may be kept, possibly a fortnight, possibly
more. But the moment I can I shall be with you.

"Write to me at the Brunswick Hôtel, Dover Street. Sweetheart, I am
yours, as you, my darling, are

                                                "Philip's.

"_P. S_.--I must put off any communication to your uncle till I can see
him. So for the moment, mum!"


Mary read the letter twice; the first time with eager eyes, the second
time more calmly. Nothing was more natural, she told herself, than
that her spirits should sink--Philip was gone. The walk with him, the
talk which was to bring them nearer, and to make them better known to
one another, stood over. The day that was to be so bright was clouded.

But beyond this the letter itself fell a little, a very little, short
of her expectations. The beginning was charming! But after that--was
it her fancy, or was her lover's tone a little flippant, a little
free, a little too easy? Did it lack that tender note of reassurance,
that chivalrous thought for her, which she had a right to expect in a
first letter? She was not sure.

And as to her uncle. She must, of course, be guided by her lover, his
will must be her law now; and it was reasonable that in John Audley's
state of health the mode of communication should be carefully weighed.
But she longed to be candid, she longed to be open; and in regard to
one person she would be open. Basset had let her see that her
treatment had cured him. At their last meeting he had been cold,
almost unkind; he had left her to deal with Toft as she could. Still
she owed him, if any one, the truth, and, were it only to set herself
right in her own eyes, she must tell him. If the news did nothing else
it would open the way for his return to the Gatehouse, and the telling
would enable her to make the _amende_.

The letter was not written on that day nor the next. But on the fourth
day after Audley's departure it arrived at Blore, and lay for an hour
on the dusty hall table amid spuds and powder-flasks and old
itineraries. There Mr. Colet found it and another letter, and removed
the two for safety to the parlor, where litter of a similar kind
struggled for the upper hand with piles of books and dog's-eared
Quarterlies. The decay of the Bassets dated farther back than the
decline of the Audleys, and the gabled house under the shadow of
Weaver was little better, if something larger, than a farm-house.
There had been a library, but Basset had taken the best books to the
Gatehouse. And there were in the closed drawing-room, and in some of
the bedrooms, old family portraits, bad for the most part; the best
lay in marble in Blore Church. But in the parlor, which was the
living-room, hung only paintings of fat oxen and prize sheep; and the
garden which ran up to the walls of the house, and in summer was a
flood of color, lay in these days dank and lifeless, ebbing away from
bee-skips and chicken-coops. The park had been ploughed during the
great war, and now pined in thin pasture. The whole of the valley was
still Basset land, but undrained in the bottom and light on the
slopes, it made no figure in a rent-roll. The present owner had
husbanded the place, and paid off charges, and cleared the estate, but
he had been able to do no more. The place was a poor man's place,
though for miles round men spoke to the owner bareheaded. He was
"Basset of Blore," as much a part of Staffordshire as Burton Bridge or
the Barbeacon. The memories of the illiterate are long.

He had been walking the hill that morning with a dog and a gun, and
between yearnings for the woman he loved, and longings for some plan
of life, some object, some aim, he was in a most unhappy mood. At one
moment he saw himself growing old, without the energy to help himself
or others, still toying with trifles, the last and feeblest of his
blood. At another he thought of Mary, and saw her smiling through the
flowering hawthorn, or bending over a book with the firelight on her
hair. Or again, stung by the lash of her reproaches he tried to harden
himself to do something. Should he take the land into his own hands,
and drain and fence and breed stock and be of use, were it only as a
struggling farmer in his own district? Or should he make that plunge
into public life to which Colonel Mottisfont had urged him and from
which he shrank as a shivering man shrinks from an icy bath?

For there was the rub. Mary was right. He was a dreamer, a weakling,
one in whom the strong pulse that had borne his forbears to the front
beat but feebly. He was not equal to the hard facts of life. With what
ease had Audley, whenever they had stood foot to foot, put him in the
second place, got the better of him, outshone him!

Old Don pointed in vain. His master shot nothing, for he walked for
the most part with his eyes on the turf. If he raised them it was to
gaze at the hamlet lying below him in the valley, the old house, the
ring of buildings and cottages, the church that he loved--and that
like the woman he loved, reproached him with his inaction.

About two o'clock he turned homewards. How many more days would he
will and not will, and end night by night where he had begun? In the
main he was of even temper, but of late small things tried him, and
when he entered the parlor and Colet rose at his entrance, he could
not check his irritation.

"For heaven's sake, man, sit still!" he cried. "And don't get up every
time I come in! And don't look at me like a dog! And don't ask me if I
want the book you are reading!"

The curate stared, and muttered an apology. It was true that he did
not wear the chain of obligation with grace.

"No, it is I who am sorry!" Basset replied, quickly repenting. "I am a
churlish ass! Get up when you like, and say what you like! But if you
can, make yourself at home!"

Then he saw the two letters lying on the table. He knew Mary's writing
at a glance, and he let it lie, his face twitching. He took up the
other, made as if he would open it, then he threw it back again, and
took Mary's to the window, where he could read it unwatched.

It was short.


"Dear Mr. Basset," she wrote, "I should be paying you a poor
compliment if I pretended that what I am writing will not pain you.
But I hope, and since our last meeting, I have reason to believe that
that pain will not be lasting.

"My cousin, Lord Audley, has asked me to marry him, and I have
consented. Nothing beyond this is fixed, and no announcement will be
made until my uncle has recovered his strength. But I feel that I owe
it to you to let you know this at once.

"I owe you something more. You crowned your kindness by doing me a
great honor. I could not reply in substance otherwise than I did, but
for the foolish criticisms of an inexperienced girl, I ask you to
believe that I feel deep regret.

"When we meet I hope that we may meet as friends. If I can believe
this it will add something to the happiness of my engagement. My uncle
is better, but little stronger than when you saw him.

                                  "I am, truly yours,

                                       "Mary Audley."


He stood looking at it for a long time, and only by an effort could he
control the emotion that strove to master him. Then his thoughts
travelled to the other, the man who had won her, the man who had got
the better of him from the first, who had played the Jacob from the
moment of their meeting on the steamer; and a passion of jealousy
swept him away. He swore aloud.

Mr. Colet leapt in his chair. "Mr. Basset!" he cried. And then, in a
different tone, "You have bad news, I fear?"

The other laughed bitterly. "Bad news?" he repeated, and Colet saw
that his face was white and that the letter shook in his hand. "The
Government's out, and that's bad news. The pig's ill, and that's bad
news. Your mother's dead, and that's bad news!"

"Swearing makes no news better," Colet said mildly.

"Not even the pig? If your--if Etruria died, and some one told you
that she was dead, you wouldn't swear? You wouldn't curse God?"

"God forbid!" the clergyman cried in horror.

"What would you do then?"

"Try so to live, Mr. Basset, that we might meet again!"

"Rubbish, man!" Basset retorted rudely. "Try instead not to be a
prig!"

"If I could be of use?"

"You cannot, nor any one else," Basset answered. "There, say no more.
The worst is over. We've played our little part and--what's the odds
how we played it?"

"Much when the curtain falls," the poor clergyman ventured.

"Well, I'll go and eat something. Hunger is one more grief!" And
Basset went out.

He came back ten minutes later, pale but quiet. "Sorry, Colet," he
said. "Very rude, I am afraid! I had bad news, but I am right now.
Wasn't there another letter for me?"

He found the letter and read it listlessly. He tossed it across the
table to his guest. "News is plentiful to-day," he said.

Colet took the letter and read it. It was from a Mr. Hatton, better
known to him than to Basset, and the owner of one of the two small
factories in Riddsley. It was an invitation to contest the borough in
opposition to young Mottisfont.


"If it were a question, respected sir," Hatton wrote, "of Whigs and
Tories we should not approach you. But as the result must depend upon
the proportions in which the Tory party splits for and against Sir
Robert Peel upon the Corn Laws, we, who are in favor of repeal,
recognize the advantage of being represented by a moderate Tory. The
adherence to Sir Robert of Sir James Graham in the North and of Lord
Lincoln in the Midlands proves that there are landowners who place
their country before their rents, and it is in the hope that you, sir,
are of the number that we invite you to give us that assistance which
your ancient name must afford.

"We are empowered to promise you the support of the Whig party in the
borough, conditioned only upon your support of the repeal of the Corn
Laws, leaving you free on other points. The Audley influence has been
hitherto paramount, but we believe that the time has come to free the
borough from the last remnant of the Feudal system.

"A deputation will wait upon you to give you such assurances as you
may desire. But as Parliament meets on an early date, and the present
member may at once apply for the Chiltern Hundreds, we shall be glad
to have your answer before the New Year."


"Well?" Basset asked. "What do you think?"

"It opens a wide door."

"If you wish to have your finger pinched," Basset replied, flippantly,
"it does. I don't know that it is an opening to anything else." And as
Colet refrained from speaking, "You don't think," he went on, "that
it's a way into Parliament? A repealer has as much chance of getting
in for Riddsley against the Audley interest as you have of being an
archdeacon! Of course the Radicals want a fight if they can find a man
fool enough to spend his money. But as for winning, they don't dream
of it."

"It is better to lose in some causes than to win in others."

Basset laughed. "Do you know why they have come to me? They think that
I shall carry John Audley with me and divide the Audley interest.
There's nothing in it, but that's the notion."

"Why look at the seamy side?" Colet objected. "I suppose there always
is one, but I don't think that it was at that side Sir Robert looked
when he made up his mind to put the country first and his party
second! I don't think that it was at that side he looked when he
determined to eat his words and pocket his pride, rather than be
responsible for famine in Ireland! Believe me, Mr. Basset," the
clergyman continued earnestly, "it was no easy change of opinion.
Before he came to that resolution, proud, cold man as I am told he is,
many a sight and sound must have knocked at the door of his mind; a
scene of poverty he passed in his carriage, a passage in some report,
a speech through which he seemed to sleep, a begging letter--one by
one they pressed the door inwards, till at last, with--it may be with
misery, he came to see what he must do!"

"Possibly."

"The call came, he had to answer it. Here is a call to you."

"And do you think," the other retorted, "that I can answer it more
cheaply than Sir Robert? So far as I have thought it out, I am with
him. But do you think I could do this," he tapped the letter, "without
misery--of a different kind it may be? I am not a public man, I have
served no apprenticeship to it, I've not addressed a meeting three
times in my life, I don't know what I should say or how I should say
it. And for Hatton and his friends, they would rub me up a dozen times
a day."

"_Non sine pulvere!_" Mr. Colet murmured.

"Dust enough there'll be! I don't doubt that. And dirt. But there's
another thing." He paused, and turning, knocked the fire together. He
was nearly a minute about it, while the other waited. "There's another
thing," he repeated. "I am not going into this business to pay out a
private grudge, and I want to be clear that I am not doing that. And
I'm not going into this simply for what I can get out of it. Ambition
is a poor stayer with me, a washy chestnut. It would not carry me
through, Colet. If I go into this, it will be because I believe in it.
It seems as if I were preaching," he continued awkwardly. "But there's
nothing but belief will carry me through, and unless I am clear--I'll
not start. I'll not start, although I want to make a fresh start
badly! Devilish badly, if you'll excuse me!"

"And how will you----"

"Make certain? I don't know. I must fight it out by myself--go up on
the hill and think it out. I must believe in the thing, or I must
leave it alone!"

"Just so," said Mr. Colet. And prudent for once he said no more.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                      AN AGENT OF THE OLD SCHOOL


It is doubtful if even the great Reform Bill of '32, which shifted the
base of power from the upper to the middle class, awoke more bitter
feelings that did the _volte face_ of Peel in the winter of '45. Since
the days of Pitt no statesman had enjoyed the popularity or wielded
the power which had been Sir Robert's when he had taken office four
years before. He had been more than the leader of the Tory party; he
had been its re-creator. He had been more than the leader of the
landed interest; he had been its pride. Men who believed that upon the
welfare of that interest rested the stability of the constitution, men
with historic names had walked on his right hand and on his left, had
borne his train and carried his messages. All things, his origin, his
formality, his pride, his quiet domestic life, even his moderation,
had been forgiven in the man who had guided the Tories through the bad
days, had led them at last to power, and still stood between them and
the mutterings of this new industrial England, that hydra-like
threatened and perplexed them.

And then--he had betrayed them. Suddenly, some held; in a panic,
scared by God knows what bugbear! Coldly and deliberately, said
others, spreading his treachery over years, laughing in his sleeve as
he led them to the fatal edge. Those who took the former view made
faint excuse for him, and perhaps still clung to him. Those who held
the latter thought no price too high, no sacrifice too costly, no
effort too great, if they could but punish the traitor! If they could
but pillory him for all to see.

So, in a moment, in the autumn of '45, as one drop of poison will
cloud the fairest water, the face of public life was changed.
Bitterness was infused into it, friend was parted from friend and son
from father, the oldest alliances were dissolved. Men stood gaping, at
a loss whither to turn and whom to trust. Many who had never in all
their lives made up their own minds were forced to have an opinion and
choose a side; and as that process is to some men as painful as a
labor to a woman, the effect was to embitter things farther. How could
one who for years past had cursed Cobden in all companies, and in
moments of relaxation had drunk to a "Bloody War and a Wet Harvest,"
turn round and join the Manchester School? It could be done, it was
done, but with what a rending of bleeding sinews only the sufferers
knew!

Strange to say, few gave weight to Sir Robert's plea of famine in
Ireland. Still more strange, when events bore out his alarm, when in
the course of a year or two a quarter of a million in that unhappy
country died of want, public feeling changed little. Those who had
remained with him, stood with him still. Those who had banded
themselves against him, held their ground. Only a handful allowed that
he was honest, after all. Nor was it until he, who rode his horse like
a sack, had died like a demi-god, with a city hanging on his breath,
and weeping women filling all the streets about the house, that the
traitor became the patriot.

But this is to anticipate. In December of '45, few men believed in
famine. Few thought much of dearth. The world was angry, blood was
hot, many dreamt of vengeance. Meantime Manchester exulted, and Coal,
Iron, Cotton toasted Peel. But even they marvelled that the man who
had been chosen to support the Corn Laws had the courage to repeal
them!

Upon no one in the whole country did the news fall with more stunning
effect than upon poor Stubbs at Riddsley. He had suspected Peel. He
had disliked his measures, and doubted whither he was moving. He had
even on the occasion of his resignation predicted that Sir Robert
would support the repeal; but he had not thought worse of him than
that, and the event left him not uncertain, nor under any stress as to
making up his mind, but naked, as it were, in an east wind. He felt
older. He owned that his generation was passing. He numbered the
friends he had left and found them few. And though he continued to
assert that no man had ever pitted himself against the land whom the
land had not broken, doubt began to creep into his mind. There were
hours when he foresaw the end of the warm farming days, of game and
sport, of Horn and Corn, ay, and of the old toast, "The farmer's best
friend--the landlord," to which he had replied at many an audit
dinner.

One thing remained--the Riddsley election. He found some comfort in
that. He drew some pleasure from the thought that Sir Robert might do
what he pleased at Tamworth, he might do what he pleased in the
Cabinet, in the Commons--there were toadies and turn-coats everywhere;
but Riddsley would have none of him! Riddsley would remain faithful!
Stubbs steeped himself in the prospect of the election, and in
preparations for it. A dozen times a day he thanked his stars that the
elder Mottisfont's weakness for Peel had provided this opening for his
energies.

Not that even on this ground he was quite happy. There was a little
bitter in the cup. He hardly owned it to himself, he did not dream of
whispering it to others, but at the bottom of his mind he had ever so
faint a doubt of his employer. A hint dropped here, a word there, a
veiled question--he could not say which of these had given him the
notion that his lordship hung between two opinions, and even--no
wonder that Stubbs dared not whisper it to others--was weighing which
would pay him best!

Such a thought was treason, however, and Stubbs buried it and trampled
on it, before he went jauntily into the snug little meeting at the
Audley Arms, which he had summoned to hear the old member's letter
read and to accept the son as a candidate in his father's place. Those
whom the agent had called were few and trusty; young Mottisfont
himself, the rector and Dr. Pepper, Bagenal the maltster, Hogg the
saddler, Musters the landlord, the "Duke" from the Leasows (which was
within the borough), and two other tradesmen. Stubbs had no liking for
big meetings. He had been bred up to believe that speeches were lost
labor, and if they must be made should be made at the Market Ordinary.

At such a gathering as this he was happy. He had the strings in his
own hands. The work to be done was at his fingers' ends. At this table
he was as great a man as my lord. With young Mottisfont, who was by
way of being a Bond Street dandy, solemn, taciturn, and without an
opinion of his own, he was not likely to have trouble. The rector was
enthusiastic but indolent, Pepper an old friend. The rest were
Stubbs's most obedient.

Stubbs read the retiring member's letter, and introduced the
candidate. The rector boomed through a few phrases of approbation, Dr.
Pepper seconded, the rest cried "Hear! hear!"

"There's little to say," Stubbs went on. "I take it that we are all of
one mind, gentlemen, to return Mr. Mottisfont in his father's place?"

"Hear! hear!" from all. "In the old interest?" Stubbs went on, looking
round the table. "And on the clear understanding that Mr. Mottisfont
is returned to oppose any tampering with the protection of
agriculture."

"That is so," said Mr. Mottisfont.

"I will see that that is embodied in Mr. Mottisfont's address," Stubbs
continued. "There must be no mistake. These are queer times----"

"Sad times!" said the rector, shaking his head.

"Terrible times!" said the maltster, shaking his.

"Never did I dream I should live to see 'em," said old Hayward.
"'Tisn't a month since a chap came on my land, ay, up to my very door,
and said things--I'll be damned if I did not think he'd turn the cream
sour! And when I cried 'Sam! fetch a pitchfork and rid me of this
rubbish----'"

"I know, Hayward," Stubbs said, cutting him short. "I know. You told
me about it. You did very well. But to business. It shall be a short
address--just that one point. We are all agreed, I think, gentlemen?"

All were agreed.

"I'll see that it is printed in good time," Stubbs continued. "I don't
think that we need trouble you further, Mr. Mottisfont. There's a
fat-stock sale this day fortnight. Perhaps you'll dine and say a few
words? I'll let you know if it is necessary. There'll be no
opposition. Hatton will have a meeting at the Institute, but nothing
will come of it."

"That's all then, is it?" said the London man, sticking his glass in
his eye with a sigh of relief.

"That's all," Stubbs replied. "If you can attend this day fortnight so
much the better. The farmers like it, and they've fourteen votes in
the borough. Thank you, gentlemen, that's all."

"I think you've forgotten one thing, Mr. Stubbs," said old Hayward,
with a twinkle.

"To be sure, I have. Ring the bell, Musters, and send up the two
bottles of your '20 port that I ordered and some glasses. A glass of
Musters' '20 port, Mr. Mottisfont, won't hurt you this cold day. And
we must drink your health. And, Musters, when these gentlemen go down,
see that they have what they call for."

The port was sipped, tasted. Mr. Mottisfont's health was drunk, and
various compliments were paid to his father. The rector took his two
glasses; so did young Mottisfont, who woke up and vowed that he had
tasted none better in St. James's Street. "Is it Garland's?" he asked.

"It is, sir," Musters said, much pleased.

"I thought it was--none better!" said young Mottisfont, also pleased.
"The old Duke drinks no other."

"Fine tipple! Fine tipple!" said the other "Duke." In the end a third
bottle was ordered, of which Musters and old Hayward drank the better
part.

At one of these meetings a sad thing had happened. A rash tradesman
had proposed his lordship's health. Of course he had been severely
snubbed. It had been considered most indecent. But on this occasion no
one was so simple as to name my lord, and Stubbs felt with
satisfaction that all had passed as it should. So had candidates been
chosen as long as he could remember.

But call no man happy until the day closes. As he left the house
Bagenal the maltster tacked himself on to him. "I'd a letter from
George this morning," he said. George was his son, articled to Mr.
Stubbs, and now with Mr. Stubbs's agents in town. "He saw his lordship
one day last week."

"Ay, ay. I suppose Master George was in the West End? Wasting his
time, Bagenal, I'll be bound."

"I don't know about that. Young fellows like to see things. He went
with a lot of chaps to see the crowd outside Sir Robert's. They'd read
in a paper that all the nobs were to be seen going in and out. Anyway,
he went, and the first person he saw going in was his lordship!"

Mr. Stubbs walked a few yards in silence. Then, "Well, he's no sight
to George," he said. "It seems to me they were both wasting their
time. I told his lordship he'd do no good. When half the dukes in
England have been at Peel, d--n him, it wasn't likely he'd change his
course for his lordship! It wasn't to be expected, Bagenal. Did George
stop to see him come out?"

"He did. And in a thundering temper my lord looked."

"Ay, ay! Well I told him how it would be."

"They were going in and out like bees, George said."

"Ay, ay."

They parted on that, and the lawyer went into his office. But his face
was gloomy. "Ay, like bees!" he muttered. "After the honey! I wonder
what he asked for! Whatever it was he couldn't have paid the price! I
thought he knew that. I've a good mind--but there, we've held it so
long, grandfather, father, and son--I can't afford to give it up."

He turned into his office, but the day was spoiled for him. And the
day was not done yet. He had barely sat down before his clerk a thin,
gray-haired man, high-nosed, with a look of breeding run to seed, came
in, and closed the door behind him. Farthingale was as well known in
Riddsley as the Maypole; gossip had it that he was a by-blow of an old
name. "I've heard something," he said darkly, "and the sooner you know
it the better. They've got a man."

Stubbs shrugged his shoulders. "For repeal in Riddsley?" he said.
"You're dreaming."

The clerk smiled. "Well, you'd best be awake," he said. He had been
long enough with Stubbs to take a liberty. "Who do you think it is?"
he continued, rubbing his chin with the feather-end of a quill.

"Some methodist parson!"

Farthingale shook his head. "Guess again, sir," he said. "You're cold
at present. It's a bird of another feather."

"A pretty big fool whoever he is!"

"Mr. Basset of Blore. I have it on good authority."

Stubbs stared. He was silent for a time, thinking hard. "Somebody's
fooled you," he said at last, but in a different tone. "He's never
shown a sign of coming out."

The clerk looked wise. "It's true," he said. "It cost me four goes of
brown brandy at the Portcullis."

"Well, you may score that to me," Stubbs answered. "Basset, eh? Well,
he's throwing his money into the gutter if it's true, and he hasn't
much to spare. I see Hatton's point. He's not the fool."

"No. He's an old bird is Hatton."

"But I don't see where Squire Basset comes in."

Farthingale looked wiser than ever. "Well," he said, "he may have a
score to pay, too. And if he has, there's more ways than one of paying
it!"

"What score?"

"Ah, I'm not saying that. Mr. John Audley's may be--against his
lordship."

"Umph! If you paid off yours at the Portcullis," Stubbs retorted,
losing his temper, "the landlord wouldn't be sorry! Scores are a deal
too much in your way, Farthingale!" he continued, severely, forgetting
in his annoyance the four goes of brown brandy. "You're too much at
home among 'em. Don't bring me cock-and-bull stories like this! I
don't believe it. And get to that lease!"

But sure enough Farthingale's story proved to be well founded, for a
week later it was known for certain in Riddsley that Mr. Basset of
Blore was coming out, and that there would be a fight for the borough.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                            MARY IS LONELY


Mary Audley was one of the last to hear the news. Etruria brought it
from the town one day in January, when the evenings were beginning to
lengthen, and the last hour of daylight was the dreariest of the
twenty-four. It had rained, and the oaks in the park were a-drip, the
thorn trees stood in tiny pools, the moorland lay stark under a pall
of fog. In the vale the Trent was in flood, its pale waters swirling
past the willow-stools, creeping over the chilled meadows, and
stealing inch by inch up the waterside lanes. Etruria's feet were wet,
and she was weary with her trudge through the mud; but when Mary met
her on the tiny landing on which their rooms opened, there was a
sparkle in the girl's eyes as bright as the red petticoat that showed
below her tucked-up gown.

"You didn't forget----" Mary was beginning, and then, "Why, Etruria,"
she exclaimed, "I believe you have seen Mr. Colet?"

Etruria blushed like the dawn. "Oh no, Miss!" she said. "He's at
Blore."

"To be sure! Then what is it?"

"I've heard some news, Miss," Etruria said. "I don't know whether
you'll be pleased or not."

"But it is certain that you are!" Mary replied with conviction. "What
is it?"

The girl told what she had heard: that there was to be an election at
Riddsley in three weeks, and not only an election but a contest, and
that the candidate who had come forward to oppose the Corn Laws was no
other than Mr. Basset--their Mr. Basset! More, that only the evening
before he had held his first meeting at the Institute, and though he
had been interrupted and the meeting had been broken up, his short
plain speech had made a considerable impression.

"Indeed, Miss," Etruria continued, carried away by the subject, "there
was one told me that when he stood up to speak she could see his hand
shake, and his face was the color of a piece of paper. But when they
began to boo and shout at him, he grew as cool as cool, and the longer
they shouted the braver he was, until they saw that if they let him go
on he would be getting a hearing! So they put out the lights and
stormed the platform, and there was a fine Stafford row, I'm told. Of
course," Etruria added simply, "the drink was in them."

Mary hardly knew what her feelings were. "Mr. Basset?" she said at
last. "I can hardly believe it."

"Nor could I, Miss, when I first heard it. But it seems they have
known it there for ten days and more, and the town is agog with it,
everybody taking sides, and some so much against him as never was.
It's dreadful to think," Etruria continued, "how misguided men can be.
But oh, Miss, I'm thankful he's on the right side, and for taking the
burden off the bread! I'm sure it will be returned to him, win or
lose. They're farmers' friends here, and they're saying shameful
things of him in the market! But there's many a woman will bless him,
and the lanes and alleys, they've no votes, but they'll pray for him!
Sometimes," Etruria added shyly, "I think it is Mr. Colet has brought
him to it."

"Mr. Colet?" Mary repeated--she did not know why she disliked the
notion. "Why do you think that?"

"He's been at Blore," Etruria murmured. "Mr. Basset has been so good
to him."

"Mr. Basset has a mind of his own," Mary answered sharply. "He is
quite capable of forming his own opinion."

"Of course. Miss," Etruria said, abashed. "I should have known that."

"Yes," Mary repeated. "But what was it they were saying of Mr. Basset
in the market, Etruria? Not that it matters."

"Well, Miss," Etruria explained, reluctantly. "They were saying it was
some grudge Mr. Basset or the Master had against his lordship that
brought Mr. Basset out."

"Against Lord Audley?" Mary cried. And she blushed suddenly and
vividly. "Why? What has he to do with it?"

"Well, Miss, it's his lordship's seat," Etruria answered naïvely;
"what he wishes has always been done in Riddsley. And he's for Mr.
Mottisfont."

Mary walked to a window and looked out. "Oh," she said, "I did not
know that. But you'd better go now, Etruria, and change your shoes.
Your feet must be wet."

Etruria went, and Mary continued to gaze through the window. What
strange news! And what a strange situation! The lover whom she had
rejected and the lover whom she had taken, pitted against one another!
And her words--she could hardly doubt it--the spur which had brought
Basset to the post!

So thinking, so pondering, she grew more and more ill at ease. Her
sympathies should have been wholly with her betrothed, but they were
not. She should have resented Basset's action. She did not. Instead
she thought of his shaking hand and his pale face, and of the courage
that had grown firmer in the face of opposition; and she found
something fine in that, something that appealed to her. And the cause
he had adopted? It was the cause to which she naturally inclined. She
might be wrong, he might be wrong. Lord Audley knew so much more of
these things and looked at them from so enlightened a standpoint, that
they must be wrong. And yet--her heart warmed to that cause.

She turned from the window in some trouble, wondering if she were
disloyal, wondering why she felt as she did; wondering a little, too,
why she had lost the first rapture of her love, and was less happy in
it than she had been.

True, she had not seen her lover again, and that might account for it.
He had been detained at Lord Seabourne's, and in London; he had been
occupied for days together with the crisis. But she had had three
letters from him, busy as he was; three amusing letters, full of
gossip and sprinkled with anecdotes of the great world. She had opened
the first in something of a tremor; but her fingers had soon grown
steady, and if she had blushed it had been for her expectation of a
vulgar love-letter such as milkmaids prize. She had been silly to
suppose that he would write in that strain.

And yet she had felt a degree of disappointment. He might have written
with less reserve, she thought; he might have discussed their plans
and hopes, he might have let the fire peep somewhere through the
chinks. But there, again, what a poor thing she was if her love must
be fed with sweetmeats. How weak her trust, how poor her affection, if
she could not bear a three weeks' parting! He had come to her, he had
chosen her, what more did she want? Did she expect him to put aside
the calls and the duties of his station, that he might hang on her
apron-strings?

Still, she was not in good spirits, and she felt her loneliness. The
house, this gray evening, with the shadows gathering in the corners,
weighed on her. Mrs. Toft was far away in her cosey kitchen, Etruria
also had gone thither. Toft was with Mr. Audley in the other wing--he
had been much with his master of late. So Mary was alone. She was not
nervous, but she was depressed. The cold stairs, the austere parlor
with its dim portraits, the matted hall, the fireless library--all
struck a chill. She remembered other times and other evenings; cosey
evenings, when the glow of the wood-fire had vied with the shaded
lights, when the three heads had bent over the three tables, when the
rustle of turning pages had blended with the snoring of the old hound,
when the pursuit of some trifle had sped the pleasant hours. Alas,
those evenings were gone, as if they had never been. The house was
dull and melancholy.

She might have gone to her uncle, but during the afternoon he had told
her that he wished to be alone; he should go to bed betimes. So about
seven o'clock she took her meal by herself, and when it was done she
felt more at a loss than ever. Presently her thoughts went again to
John Audley.

Had she neglected him of late? Had she left him too much to Toft, and
let her secret, which she hated to keep secret, come between them? Why
should she not, even now, see him before he slept? She could take him
the news of Mr. Basset's enterprise. It would serve for an excuse.

Lest her courage should fail she went at once, shivering as she passed
through the shadowy library, where a small lamp, burning on a table,
did no more than light her to the staircase. She ran up the stairs and
was groping for the handle of Mr. Audley's door when the door opened
abruptly and Toft stepped out, a candle in his hand. She was so close
to him that he all but touched her, and he was, if anything, more
startled than she was. He stood gaping at her.

Through the narrow opening she had a glimpse of her uncle, who was on
his feet before the fire. He was fully dressed.

That surprised her, for, even before this last attack, he had spent
most of his time in his dressing-gown. Still more surprising was
Toft's conduct. He shut the door and held it. "The master is going to
bed, Miss," he said.

"I see that he is dressed!" she replied. And she looked at Toft in
such a way that the man gave way, took his hand from the door, and
stood aside. She pushed the door open and went in. Her uncle, standing
with his back to her, was huddling on his dressing-gown.

"What is it?" he cried, his face averted. "Who is it?"

"It is only I, sir," she replied. "Mary." She closed the door.

"But I thought I told you that I didn't want you!" he retorted
pettishly. "I am going to bed." He turned, having succeeded in girding
on his dressing-gown. "Going to bed," he repeated. "Didn't I tell you
so?"

"I'm very sorry, sir," she said, "but I had news for you. News that
has surprised me. I thought that you would like to hear it."

He looked at her, his furtive eyes giving the lie to his plump face,
which sagged more than of old. "News," he muttered, peevishly. "What
news? I wish you wouldn't startle me. You ought to remember that--that
excitement is bad for me. And you come at this time of night with
news! What is it?" He was not looking at her. He seemed to be seeking
something. "What is it?"

"It's nothing very terrible," she answered, smiling. "Nothing to alarm
you, uncle. Won't you sit down?"

He looked about him like a man driven into a corner. "No, no, I don't
want to sit down!" he said. "I ought to be in bed! I ought to be there
now."

"Well, I shall not keep you long," she answered, trying to humor his
mood, while all the time she was wondering why he was dressed at this
time, he whom she had not seen dressed for a fortnight. And why had
Toft tried to keep her out? "It is only," she continued, "that I heard
to-day that there is to be a contest at Riddsley. And that Mr. Basset
is to be one of the candidates."

"Is that all?" he said. "News, you said? That's no news! Bigger fool
he, unless he does more for himself than he does for his friends!
Peter the Hermit become Peter the Great! He'll soon find himself Peter
the Piper, who picked a peck of pepper! Hot pepper he'll find it, d--n
him!" with sudden spite. "He's no better than the rest! He's all for
himself! All for himself!" he repeated, his voice rising in his
excitement.

"But----"

"There, don't agitate me!" He wiped his brow with a shaking hand,
while his eyes, avoiding hers, continued to look about him as if he
sought something. "I knew how it would be. You've no thought for me.
You don't remember how weak I am! Hardly able to crawl across the
floor, to put one foot before another. And you come chattering!
chattering!"

She had thought him odd before, but never so odd as this evening; and
she was sorry that she had come. She was going to say what she could
and escape, when he began again. "You're the last person who should
upset me! The very last!" he babbled. "When it's all for you! It's
little good it can do me. And Basset, he'd the ball at his foot,
and wouldn't kick it! But I'll show you, I'll show you all!" he
continued, gesticulating with a violence that distressed Mary. "Ay,
and I'll show _him_ what I am! He thinks he's safe, d--n him! He
thinks he's safe! He's spending my money and adding up my balance!
He's walking on my land and sleeping in my bed! He's peacocking in my
name! But--but----" he stopped, struggling for words. For an instant
he turned on her over his shoulder a face distorted by passion.

Thoroughly alarmed, she tried to soothe him. "But I am sure, sir," she
said, "Mr. Basset would never----"

"Basset!"

"I'm sure he never dreamt----"

"Basset!" he repeated. "No! but Audley! Lord Audley, Audley of
Beaudelays, Audley of nowhere and nothing! And no Audley! no Audley!"
he repeated furiously, while again he fought for breath, and again he
mastered himself and lowered his tone. "No Audley!" he whispered,
pointing a hand at her, "but Jacob, girl! Jacob the supplanter, Jacob
the changeling, Jacob the baseborn! And he thinks I lie awake of
nights, hundreds of nights, for nothing! He thinks I dream of him--for
nothing! He thinks I go out with the bats--for nothing! He thinks I
have a canker here! Here!" And he clapped his hand to his breast, a
grotesque, yet dreadful figure in his huddled dressing-gown, his
flaccid cheeks quivering with rage. "For nothing! But I'll show him!
I'll ruin him! I'll----"

His voice, which had risen to a scream, stopped. Toft had opened the
door. "Sir! Mr. Audley!" he cried. "For God's sake be calm! For God's
sake have a care, sir! And you, Miss," he continued; "you see what you
have done! If you'll leave him I'll get him to bed. I'll get him to
bed and quiet him--if I can."

Mary was shocked, and yet she felt that she could not go without a
word. "Dear uncle," she said, "you wish me to go?"

He had clutched one of the posts of the bed and was supporting himself
by it. The fire had died down in him, he was no more now than a
feeble, shaking old man. He wiped his brow and his lips. "Yes, go," he
whispered. "Go."

"I am very sorry I disturbed you," she said. "I won't do it again. You
were right, Toft. Good-night."

The man said "Good-night, Miss." Her uncle said nothing. He had let
himself down on the bed, but he still clung to the post. Mary looked
at him in sorrow, grieved to leave him in this state. But she had no
choice, and she went out and, closing the door behind her, groped her
way down the narrow staircase.

It was a little short of ten when she reached the parlor, but she was
in no mood for reading. What she had seen had shocked and frightened
her. She was sure now that her uncle was not sane; and while she was
equally sure that Toft exercised a strong influence over him, she had
her misgivings as to that. Something must be done. She must consult
some one. Life at the Gatehouse could not go on on this footing. She
must see Dr. Pepper.

Unluckily when she had settled this to her mind, and sought her bed,
she could not sleep. Long after she had heard Etruria go to her room,
long after she had heard the girl's shoes fall--familiar sound!--Mary
lay awake, thinking now of her uncle's state and her duty towards him,
nor of her own future, that future which seemed for the moment to have
lost its brightness. Doubts that the sun dismisses, fears at which
daylight laughs, are Giants of Despair in the dark watches. So it was
with her. Misgivings which she would not have owned in the daylight,
rose up and put on grisly shapes. Her uncle and his madness, her lover
and his absence, passed in endless procession through her brain. In
vain she tossed and turned, sat up in despair, tried the cooler side
of the pillow. She could not rest.

The door creaked. She fancied a step on the staircase, a hand on the
latch. Far away in the depths of the house a clock struck. It was
three o'clock--only three o'clock! And it would not be light before
eight--not much before eight. Oh dear! Oh dear!

And then she slept.

When she awoke it was morning, the light was filtering in through the
white dimity curtains, and some one was really at her door. Some one
was knocking. She sat up. "What is it?" she cried.

"Can I come in, Miss?"

The voice was Mrs. Toft's, and Mary needed no second warning. She knew
in a moment that the woman brought bad news. She sprang out of bed,
put on a dressing-gown, and with bare feet she went to the door. She
unlocked it. "What is it, Mrs. Toft?" she said.

"Maybe not much," the woman answered cautiously. "I hope not, Miss,
but I had to tell you. The Master is missing."

"Missing?" Mary exclaimed, the blood leaving her face. "Impossible!
Why, I saw him, I was in his room last evening after nine o'clock."

"Toft was with him up to eleven," Mrs. Toft answered. Her face was
grave. "But he's gone now?"

"You mean that he is not in his room!" Mary said. "But have you
looked----" and she named places where her uncle might be--places in
the house.

"We've looked there," Mrs. Toft answered. "Toft's been everywhere. The
Master's not in the house. We're well-nigh sure of that. And the door
in the courtyard was open this morning. I am afraid he's gone, Miss."

"In his state and at night? Why, it's----" The girl broke off and took
hold of herself. "Very well," she said. "I shall not be more than five
minutes. I will come down."




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                               MISSING


Mary scrambled into her clothes without pausing to do more than knot
up her hair. She tried to steady her nerves and to put from her the
thought that it was her visit which had upset her uncle. That thought
would only flurry her, and she must be cool. In little more than the
five minutes that she had named she was in the hall, and found Mrs.
Toft waiting for her. The door into the courtyard stood open, the
bleak light and raw air of a January morning poured in, but neither of
them heeded this. Their eyes met, and Mary saw that the woman, who was
usually so placid, was frightened.

"Where is Toft?" Mary asked.

"He's away this ten minutes," Mrs. Toft replied. "He's gone to the Yew
Walk, where you found the Master before. But law, Miss, if he's there
in this weather!" She lifted up her hands.

Mary controlled herself. "And Etruria?" she asked.

"She's searching outside the house. If she does not find him she is to
run over to Petch the keeper, and bring him."

"Quite right," Mary said. "Did Toft take any brandy?"

"He did. Miss. And the big kettle is on, if there is a bath wanted,
and I've put a couple of bricks to heat in the oven."

"You're sure you've looked everywhere in the house?"

"As sure as can be, Miss! More by token, I've some coffee ready for
you in the parlor."

But Mary said, "Bring it here, Mrs. Toft." And snatching up a shawl
and folding it about her, she stepped outside. It was a gray, foggy
morning, and the flagged court wore a desolate air. In one corner a
crowd of dead leaves were circling in the gusts of wind, in another a
little pile of snow had drifted, and between the monsters that flanked
the Gateway, the old hound, deaf and crippled, stood peering across
the park. Mary fancied that the dog descried Toft returning, and she
ran across the court. But no one was in sight. The park with its
clumps of dead bracken, its naked trees and gnarled blackthorns,
stretched away under a thin sprinkling of snow. Shivering she returned
to the hall, where Mrs. Toft awaited her with the coffee.

"Now," Mary said, "tell me about it, please--from the beginning."

"Toft had left Mr. Audley about eleven," Mrs. Toft explained. "The
Master had been a bit put out, and that kept him. But he'd settled
down, and when Toft left him he was much as usual. It could not have
been before eleven," Mrs. Toft continued, rubbing her nose, "for I
heard the kitchen clock strike eleven, and I was asleep when Toft came
in. The next I remember was finding Toft had got out of bed. 'What is
it?' says I. He didn't answer, and I roused up and was going to get a
light. But he told me not to make a noise, he'd been woke by hearing a
door slam, and thought that some one had crossed the court. He was at
the window then, looking out, but we heard nothing, and after a while
Toft came back to bed."

"What time was that?"

"I couldn't say, Miss, and I don't suppose Toft could. It was dark and
before six, because when I woke again it was on six. But God knows it
was a thousand pities we didn't search then, for it's on my mind that
it was the poor Master. And if we'd known, Toft would have stopped
him."

"Well?" Mary said gravely. "And when did you miss him?"

"Most mornings Etruria'd let me into the house. But this morning she
found the door unlocked; howsomever she thought nothing of it, for
Toft has a key as well, and since the Master's illness and him coming
and going at all hours, he has not always locked the door; so she made
no remark. A bit before eight Toft came down--I didn't see him but I
heard him--and at eight he took up the Master's cup of tea. Toft makes
it in the pantry and takes it up."

Mrs. Toft paused heavily--not without enjoyment.

"Yes," Mary said anxiously, "and then?"

"I suppose it was five minutes after, he came out to me--I was in the
kitchen getting our breakfast--and he was shaking all over. I don't
know that I ever saw a man more upset. 'He's gone!' he said. 'Law,
Toft,' I said. 'What's the matter? Who's gone?' 'The Master!' he said.
'Fiddlesticks!' says I. 'Where should he go?' And with that I went
into the house and up to the Master's room. When I saw it was empty
you could have knocked me down with a feather! I looked round a bit,
and then I went up to Mr. Basset's room that's over, and down again to
the library, and so forth. By that time Toft was there, gawpin about.
'He's gone!' he kept saying. I don't know as I ever saw Toft truly
upset before."

"And what then?" Mary asked. Twice she had looked through the door,
but to no purpose.

"Well," I said, "if he's not here he can't be far! Don't twitter, man,
but think! It's my belief he's away sleepwalking or what not, to the
place you found him before. On that I gave Toft some brandy and he
went off."

"Shouldn't he be back by now?"

"He should, Miss, if he's not found him," Mrs. Toft answered. "But, if
he's found him, he couldn't carry him! Toft's not all that strong. And
if the Master's lain out long, it's not all the brandy in the world
will bring him round!"

Mary shuddered, and moved by a common impulse the two went out and
crossed the court. The old hound was still at gaze in the gateway,
still staring with purblind eyes down the vistas of the park. "Maybe
he sees more than we see," Mrs. Toft muttered. "He'd not stand there,
would the old dog, as he's stood twenty minutes, for nothing."

She was right, for the next moment three figures appeared hurrying
across the park towards them. It was impossible to mistake Toft's
lanky figure. The others were Etruria, with a shawl about her head,
and the keeper Petch.

Mary scanned them anxiously. "Have they found him?" she murmured.

"No," Mrs. Toft said. "If they'd found him, one would have stopped
with him."

"Of course," Mary said. And heedless of the cold, searching wind that
swung their skirts and carried showers of dead leaves sailing past
them, they waited until Toft and the others, talking together, came
up. Mary saw that, in spite of the pace at which he had walked, Toft's
face was colorless. He was almost livid. His daughter wore an anxious
look, while the keeper was pleasantly excited.

As soon as the three were within hearing, "You've not found him?" Mary
cried.

"No, Miss," Etruria answered.

"Nor any trace?"

"No, Miss. My father has been as far as the iron gate, and found it
locked. It was no use going on."

"He could not have walked farther without help," Mrs. Toft said. "If
the Master's not between us and the gardens he's not that way."

"Then where is he?" Mary cried, aghast. She looked from one to the
other. "Where can he be, Toft?"

Toft raised his hands and let them fall. It was clear that he had
given up hope.

But his wife was of different mettle. "That's to be seen," she said
briskly. "Anyway, you'll be perished here, Miss, and I don't want
another invalid on my hands. We'll go in, if you please."

Mary gave way. They turned to go in, but it was noticeable that as
they moved towards the house each, stirred by the same thought, swept
the extent of the park with eyes that clung to it, and were loth to
leave it. Each hung for a moment, searching this alley or that,
fancying a clue in some distant object, or taking a clump of gorse, or
a jagged stump for the fallen man. All were harassed by the thought
that they might be abandoning him; that in turning their backs on the
bald, wintry landscape they might be carrying away with them his last
chance.

"'T would take a day to search the park," the keeper muttered. "And a
dozen men, I'm afeared, to do it thoroughly."

"Why not take a round yourself!" Mrs. Toft replied. "And if you find
nothing be at the house in an hour, Petch, and we'll know better
what's to do. The poor gentleman's off his head, I doubt, and there's
no saying where he'd wander. But he can't be far, and I'm beginning to
think he's in the house after all."

The man agreed willingly, and strode away across the turf. The others
entered the hall. Mary was for pausing there, but Mrs. Toft swept them
all into the parlor where a good fire was burning. "You'll excuse me,
Miss," she said, "but Toft will be the better for this," and without
ceremony she poured out a cup of coffee, jerked into it a little
brandy from the decanter on the sideboard, and handed it to her
husband. "Drink that," she said, "and get your wits together, man!
You're no better than a wisp of paper now, and it's only you can help
us. Now think! You know him best. Where can he be? Did he say no word
last night to give you a clue?"

A little color came back to Toft's face. He sighed and passed his hand
across his forehead. "If I'd never left him!" he said. "I never ought
to have left him!"

"It's no good going over that!" Mrs. Toft replied impatiently. "He
means, Miss, that up to three nights ago he slept in the Master's
room. Then when the Master seemed better Toft came back to his bed."

"I ought to have stayed with him," Toft repeated. That seemed the one
thought in his mind.

"But where is he?" Mary cried. "Where? Every moment we stand
talking--can't you think where he might go? Are there no
hiding--places in the house? No secret passages?"

Mrs. Toft raised her hands. "Lord's sake!" she exclaimed. "There's the
locked closet in his room where he keeps his papers. I never looked
there. It's seldom opened, and----"

She did not finish. With one accord they hurried through the library
and up the stairs to the old tapestried room, where Mr. Audley had
slept and for the last month had lived. The others had been in it
since his disappearance, Mary had not; and she felt a thrill of awe as
she passed the threshold. The angular faces, the oblique eyes, of the
watchers in the needlework on the wall, that from generation to
generation had looked down on marriage and birth and death--what had
they seen during the past night? On what had they gazed, she asked
herself. Mrs. Toft, less fanciful or more familiar with the room, had
no such thoughts. She crossed the floor to a low door which was
outlined for those who knew of its existence, by rough cuts in the
arras. It led into a closet, contained in one of the turrets.

Mrs. Toft tried the door, shook it, knocked on it. Finally she set her
eye to the keyhole. "He's not there," she said. "There's no key in the
lock. He'd not take out the key, that's certain."

Mary scanned the disordered room. Books lay in heaps on the deep
window-seats, and even on the floor. A table by one of the windows was
strewn with papers and letters; on another beside the bed-head stood a
tray with night drinks, a pair of candles, an antique hour-glass, a
steel pistol. The bedclothes were dragged down, as if the bed had been
slept in, and over the rail at the foot, half hidden by the heavy
curtains, hung a nightgown. She took this up and found beneath it a
pair of slippers and a shoehorn.

"He was dressed then?" she exclaimed.

Toft eyed the things. "Yes, Miss, I've no doubt he was," he said
despondently. "His overcoat's gone."

"Then he meant to leave the house?" Mary cried.

"God save us!"

"He's taken his silver flask too," Etruria said in a low voice. She
was examining the dressing-table. "And his watch."

"His watch?"

"Yes, Miss."

"But that's odd," Mary said, fixing her eyes on Toft. "Don't you
think that's odd? If my uncle had rambled out in some nightmare or--or
wandering, would he have taken his flask and his watch, Toft? Are his
spectacles there?"

Toft inspected the table, raised the pillow, felt under the bolster.
"No, Miss," he said; "he's taken them."

"Ah!" Mary replied; "then I have hope. Wherever he is, he is in his
senses. Now, Toft!"--she looked hard at the man--"think again! Surely
since he had this in his mind last night he must have let something
drop? Some word?"

The man shook his head. "Not that I heard, Miss," he said.

Mary sighed. But Mrs. Toft was less patient. She exploded. "You
gaby!" she cried. "Where's your senses? It's to you we're looking, and
a poor stick you are in time of trouble! I couldn't have believed it!
Find your tongue, Toft, say something! You knew the Master down to his
shoe leather. Let's hear what you do think! He couldn't walk far! He
couldn't walk a mile without help. Where is he? Where do you think he
is?"

Toft's answer silenced them. If one of the mute, staring figures on
the walls--that watched as from the boxes of a theatre the living
actors--had stepped down, it would hardly have affected them more
deeply. The man sat down on the bed, covered his face with his hands,
and rocking himself to and fro broke into a passion of weeping. "The
poor Master!" he cried between his sobs. "The poor Master!"

Quickly at that Mary's feelings underwent a change. As if she had
stood already beside her uncle's grave, sorrow took the place of
perplexity. His past kindness dragged at her heart-strings. She forgot
that she had never been able to love him, she forgot that behind the
man whom she had known she had been ever conscious of another being,
vague, shifting, inhuman. She remembered only the help he had given,
the home he had offered, the rare hours of sympathy. "Don't, Toft,
don't!" she cried, tears in her voice. She touched the man on the
shoulder. "Don't give up hope!"

As for Mrs. Toft, surprise silenced her. When she found her voice,
"Well," she said, looking round her with a sort of pride, "who'll say
after this that Toft's a hard man? Why, if the Master was lying on
that bed ready for burial--and we're some way off that, the Lord be
thanked!--he couldn't carry on more! But there, let's look now, and
weep afterwards! Pull yourself together, Toft, or who's the young lady
to depend on? If you take my advice, Miss," she continued, "we'll get
out of this room. It always did give me the fantods with them
Egyptians staring at me from the walls, and to-day it's worse than a
hearse! Now downstairs----"

"You are quite right, Mrs. Toft," Mary said. "We'll go downstairs."
She shared to the full Mrs. Toft's distaste for the room. "We're doing
no good here, and your husband can follow us when he is himself again.
Petch should be back by this time, and we ought to arrange what is to
be done outside."

Toft made no demur, and they went down. They found the keeper waiting
in the hall. He had made no discovery, and Mary, to whom Toft's
breakdown had given fresh energy, took things into her own hands. She
gave Petch his orders. He must get together a dozen men, and search
the park and every place within a mile of the Gatehouse. He must
report by messenger every two hours to the house, and in the meantime
he must send a man on horseback to the town for Dr. Pepper.

"And Mr. Basset?" Mrs. Toft murmured.

"I will write a note to Mr. Basset," Mary said, "and the man must send
it by post-horses from the Audley Arms. I will write it now." She sat
down in the library, cold as the room was, and scrawled three lines,
telling Basset that her uncle had disappeared during the night, and
that, ill as he was, she feared the worst.

Then, when Petch had gone to get his men together--a task which would
take time as there were no farms at hand--she and Mrs. Toft searched
the house room by room, while Etruria and her father went again
through the outbuildings. But the quest was as fruitless as the former
search had been.

Mary had known many unhappy days in Paris, days of anxiety, of
loneliness, of apprehension, when she had doubted where she would
lodge or what she would eat for her next meal. Now she had a source of
strength in her engagement and her love, which should have been
inexhaustible. But she never forgot the misery of this day, nor ever
looked back on it without a shudder. Probably there were moments when
she sat down, when she took a tasty meal, when she sought Mrs. Toft in
her warm kitchen or talked with Etruria before her own fire. But as
she remembered the day, she spent the long hours gazing across the
wintry park; now catching a glimpse of the line of beaters as it
appeared for a moment crossing a glade, now watching the approach of
the messenger who came to tell her that they had found nothing; or
again straining her eyes for the arrival of Dr. Pepper, who, had she
known it, was at the deathbed of an old patient, ten miles on the
farther side of Riddsley.

Now and again a hailstorm swept across the park, and Mrs. Toft came
out and scolded her into shelter; or a farmer, whose men had been
borrowed, "happened that way," and after a gruff question touched his
hat and went off to join the searchers. Once a distant cry seemed to
herald a discovery, and she tried to steady her leaping pulses. But
nothing came of it except some minutes of anxiety. And once her
waiting ear caught the clang of the bell that hung in the hall and she
flew through the house to the front door, only to learn that the
visitor was the carrier who three times a week called for letters on
his way to town. The dreary house with its open doors, its cold
draughts, its unusual aspect, the hurried meals, the furtive glances,
the hours of suspense and fear--these stamped the day for ever on
Mary's memory: as sometimes an hour of loneliness prints itself on the
mind of a child who all his life long hears with distaste the clash of
wedding bells.

At length the wintry day with its gusts of snow began to draw in.
Before four Petch sent in to say that he had beaten the park and also
the gardens at the Great House, but had found nothing. Half his men
were now searching the slope on either side of the Riddsley road. With
the other half he was going to explore, while the light lasted, the
fringe of the Chase towards Brown Heath.

That left Mary face to face with the night; with the long hours of
darkness, which inaction must render infinitely worse than those of
the day. She had visions of the windswept park, the sullen ponds, the
frozen moorland; they spread before her fraught with some brooding
terror. She had never much marked, she had seldom felt the loneliness
of the house. Now it pressed itself upon her, isolated her, menaced
her. It made the thought of the night, that lay before her, almost
unbearable.




                            CHAPTER XXVII

                        A FOOTSTEP IN THE HALL


Mrs. Toft bringing in candles, and looking grave enough herself,
noticed the girl's pale face and chid her gently. "I don't believe
that you've sat down this blessed day, Miss!" she said. "Nor no more
than looked at good food. But tea you shall have and sit down to it,
or my name's not Anne Toft! Fretting's no manner of use, and fasting's
a poor stick to beat trouble with!"

"But, Mrs. Toft," Mary said, her face piteous, "it's the thought that
he may be lying out there, helpless and dying, while we sit here----"

"Steady, Miss! Giving way does no good, and too much mind's worse than
none. If he's out there he's gone, poor gentleman, long ago. And Dr.
Pepper'll say the same. It's not in reason he should be alive if he's
in the open. And, God knows, if he's under cover it's little better."

"But then if he is alive!" Mary cried. "Think of another night!"

"Ay, I know," Mrs. Toft said. "And hard it is! But you've been a model
all this blessed day, and it's no time to break down now. Where that
dratted doctor is, beats me, though he could do no more than we've
done! But there, Mr. Basset will be with us to-morrow, and he'll find
the poor gentleman dead or alive! There's some as are more to look at
than the Squire, but there's few I'd put before him at a pinch!"

"Where's Toft?" Mary asked.

"He went to join Petch two hours ago," Mrs. Toft explained. "And there
again, take Toft. He's a good husband, but there's no one would say he
was a man to wear his heart outside. But you saw how hard he took it?
I don't know," Mrs. Toft continued thoughtfully, "as I've seen Toft
shed a tear these twenty years--no, nor twice since we went to
church!"

"You don't think," Mary asked, "that he knows more than he has told
us?"

The question took Mrs. Toft aback. "Why, Miss," she said, "you don't
mean as you think he was putting on this morning?"

"No," Mary answered. "But is it possible that he knows the worst and
does not tell us?"

"And why shouldn't he tell us? It would be strange if he wouldn't tell
his own wife? And you that's Mr. Audley's nearest!"

"It's all so strange," Mary pleaded. "My uncle is gone. Where has he
gone?"

Mrs. Toft did not answer the question. She could not. And there came
an interruption. "That's Petch's voice," she said. "They're back."

The men trooped into the hall. They advanced to the door of the
parlor, Petch leading, a man whom Mary did not know next to him, after
these a couple of farmers and Toft, in the background a blur of faces
vaguely seen.

"We've found something, Miss," Petch said. "At least Tom has. But I'm
not sure it lightens things much. He was going home by the Yew Tree
Walk and pretty close to the iron gate, when what should he see lying
in the middle of the walk but this!"

Petch held out a silver flask.

"It's the Master's, sure enough," Mrs. Toft said.

"Ay," Petch answered. "But the odd thing is, I searched that place
before noon, a'most inch by inch, looking for footprints, and I went
over it again when we were beating the Yew Tree Walk this afternoon,
and I'm danged if that flask was there then!"

"I don't think as you could ha' missed it, Mr. Petch," the finder
said, "it was that bright and plain!"

"But isn't the grass long there?" Mary asked. She had already as much
mystery as she could bear and wanted no addition to it.

"Not that long," said Tom.

"No, not that long, the lad's right," Petch added. "I warrant I must
have seen it."

"That you must, Mr. Petch," a lad in the background said. "I was next
man, and I wondered when you'd ha' done that bit."

"But I don't understand," Mary answered. "If it was not there, this
morning----"

"I don't understand neither, lady," the keeper rejoined. "But it is on
my mind that there's foul play!"

"Oh, but," Mary protested, "who--why should any one hurt my uncle?"

"I can't say as to that," Petch replied, darkly. "I don't know anybody
as would. But there's the flask, and flasks don't travel without
hands. If he took it out of the house with him----"

"May he not have dropped it--this afternoon?" Mary suggested. "Suppose
he wandered that way after you passed?"

The keeper shook his head. "If he had passed that way this afternoon
it isn't one but six pairs of eyes would ha' seen him."

There was a murmur of assent. The searchers were keenly enjoying the
drama, taking in every change that appeared on the girl's face. They
were men into whose lives not much of drama entered.

"But I cannot think that what you say is likely!" Mary protested. She
had held her own stoutly through the day, but now with the eyes of all
these men upon her she grew bewildered. The rows of faces, the bashful
hands twisting caps, the blurred white of smocked frocks--grew and
multiplied and became misty. She had to grasp the table to steady
herself.

Mrs. Toft saw how it was, and came to the rescue. "What's Toft say
about it?" she asked.

"Ay, to be sure, missus," Petch agreed. "I dunno as he's said anything
yet."

"I don't think the Master could have passed and not been seen," Toft
replied. His tone was low, and in the middle of his speech he
shivered. "But I'm not saying that the flask wasn't there this
morning. It's a small thing."

"It couldn't have been overlooked, Mr. Toft," the keeper replied
firmly. "I speak as I know!"

Again Mrs. Toft intervened. "I'm sure nobody would ha' laid a hand on
the Master!" she said. "Nobody in these parts and nobody foreign, as I
can fancy. I've no doubt at all the poor gentleman awoke with some
maggot in his brain and wandered off, not knowing. The question is,
what can we do? The young lady's had a sad day, and it's time she was
left to herself."

"There's nothing we can do now," Petch said flatly. "It stands to
reason if we've found nothing in the daylight we'll find nothing in
the dark. We'll be back at eight in the morning. Whether we'd ought to
let his lordship know----"

"Sho!" said Mrs. Toft with scorn. "What's he in it, I'd like to know?
But there, you've said what you come to say and it's time we left the
young lady to herself."

Mary raised her head. "One moment," she said. "I want to thank you all
for what you've done. And for what Petch says about the flask, he's
right to speak out, but I can't think any one would touch my uncle.
Only--can we do nothing? Nothing more? Nothing at all? If we don't
find him to-night----" She broke off, overcome by her feelings.

"I'm afraid not, Miss," Petch said gently. "We'd all be willing,
but we don't know where to look. I own I'm fair beat. Still Tom and
I'll stay an hour or two with Toft in case of anything happening.
Good-night, Miss. You're very welcome, I'm sure."

The others murmured their sympathy as they trooped out into the
darkness. Mrs. Toft bustled away for the tea, and Mary was left alone.

Suspense lay heavy on her. She felt that she ought to be doing
something and she did not know what to do. Dr. Pepper did not come,
the Tofts were but servants. They could not take the onus, they could
not share her burden; and Toft was a broken reed. Meanwhile time
pressed. Hours, nay, minutes might make all the difference between
life and death.

When Etruria came in with Mary's tea she found her mistress bending
over the fire in an attitude of painful depression, and she said a few
words, trying to impart to her something of her own patience. That
patience was a fine thing in Etruria because it was natural. But Mary
was of sterner stuff. She had a more lively imagination, and she could
not be blind to the issues, or to the value of every moment that
passed. Even while she listened to Etruria she saw with the eyes of
fancy a hollow amid a clump of trees not far from a pool that she
knew. In summer it was a pleasant dell, clothed with mosses and ferns
and the flowers of the bog-bean; in winter a dank, sombre hollow.
There she saw her uncle lie, amid the decaying leaves, the mud, the
rank grass; and the vision was too much for her. What if he were
really lying there, while she sat here by the fire? Sat here in this
home which he--he had given her, amid the comforts which he had
provided!

The thought was horrible, and she turned fiercely on the comforter.
"Don't!" she cried. "You don't think! You don't understand! We can't
go through the night like this! They must go on looking! Fetch your
father! And bring Petch! Bring them here!" she cried.

Etruria went, alarmed by her excitement, but almost as quickly she
came back. Toft had gone out with Petch and the other man. They would
not be long.

Mary cried out on them, but could do no more than walk the room, and
after a time Etruria coaxed her to sit down and eat; and tea and food
restored her balance. Still, as she sat and ate she listened--she
listened always. And Etruria, taught by experience, let her be and
said nothing.

At last, "How long they are!" Mary cried. "What are they doing? Are
they never----"

She stopped. The footsteps of two men coming through the hall had
reached her ears, and she recognized the tread of one--recognized it
with a rush of relief so great, of thankfulness so overwhelming that
she was startled and might well have been more than startled, had she
been free to think of anything but the lost man. It was Basset's step,
and she knew it--she would have known it, she felt, among a hundred!
He had come! An instant later he stood in the doorway, booted and
travel-stained, his whip in his hand, just as he had dropped from the
saddle--and with a face grave indeed, but calm and confident. He
seemed to her to bring relief, help, comfort, safety, all in one!

"Oh!" she cried. "You are here! How--how good of you!"

"Not good at all," he answered, advancing to the table and quietly
taking off his gloves. "Your messenger met me half-way to Blore. I was
coming into Riddsley to a meeting. I had only to ride on. Of course I
came."

"But the meeting?" she asked fearfully. Was he only come to go again?

"D--n the meeting!" he answered, moved to anger by the girl's pale
face. "Will you give me a cup of tea, Toft? I will hear Miss Audley's
account first. Keep Petch and the other man. We shall want them. In
twenty minutes I'll talk to you. That will do."

Ah, with what gratitude, with what infinite relief, did Mary hear his
tone of authority! He watched Toft out of the room and, alone with
her, he looked at her. He saw that her hand shook as she filled the
teapot, that her lips quivered, that she tried to speak and could not.
And he felt an infinite love and pity, though he drove both out of his
voice when he spoke. "Yes, tea first," he said coolly, as he took off
his riding coat. "I've had a long journey. You must take another cup
with me. You can leave things to me now. Yes, two lumps, please, and
not too strong." He knocked together the logs, and warmed his hands,
stooping over the fire with his back to her. Then he took his place at
the table, and when he had drunk half a cup of tea, "Now," he said,
"will you tell me the story from the beginning. And take time. More
haste, less speed, you know."

With a calmness that surprised herself, Mary told the tale. She
described the first alarm, the hunt through the house, the discoveries
in the bedroom, Toft's breakdown, last of all the search through the
park and the finding of the flask.

He listened gravely, asking a question now and then. When she had
done, "What of Toft?" he inquired. "Not been very active, has he? Not
given you much help?"

"No! But how did you guess?" she asked in surprise.

"I'm afraid that Toft knows more than he has told you. For the rest,"
he looked at her kindly, "I want you to give up the hope of finding
your uncle alive. I have none. But I think I can promise you that
there has been no suffering. If it turns out as I imagine, he was dead
before he was missed. What the doctor expected has happened. That is
all."

"I don't understand," she said.

"And I don't want to say more until I know for certain. May I ring for
Toft?" She nodded. He rang, and after a pause, during which he stood,
silent and waiting, the servant came in. He shot a swift glance at
them, and dropped his eyes.

"Tell Petch and the other man to be ready to start with us in five
minutes," Basset said. "Let them fetch a hurdle, and do you put a
mattress on it. I suppose--you made sure he was dead, Toft, before you
left him?"

The man flinched before the sudden question, but he showed less
emotion than Mary. Perhaps he had expected it. After a pause, during
which Basset did not take his eyes from him, "I made sure," he said in
a low voice. "As God sees me, I did! But if you think I raised a hand
to him----"

"I don't!" Basset said sternly. "I don't think so badly of you as
that. But nothing but frankness can save you now. Is he in the Great
House?"

Toft opened his mouth, but he seemed unable to speak. He nodded.

"What about the flask?"

"I dropped it," the man muttered. He turned a shade paler. "I could
not bear to think he was lying there. I thought it would lead the
search--that way, and they would find him."

"I see. That's enough now. Be ready to start at once."

The man went out. "Good heavens!" Mary cried. She was horror-stricken.
"And he has known it all this time! Do you think that he--he had any
part----"

"Oh no. He was alone with Mr. Audley when he collapsed, and he lost
his head. They were together in the Great House--it was a difficult
position--and he did not see his way to explain. He may have seen
some advantage in gaining time--I don't know. The first thing to be
done is to bring your uncle home. I will see to that. You have borne
up nobly--you have done your part. Do you go to bed now."

Something in his tone, and in his thought for her, brought old times
to Mary's mind and the blood to her pale cheek. She did not say no,
but she would not go to bed. She made Etruria come to her, and the two
girls sat in the parlor listening and waiting, moving only when it was
necessary to snuff the candles. It was a grim vigil. An hour passed,
two hours. At length they caught the first distant murmur, the tread
of men who moved slowly and heavily under a burden--there are few who
have not at one time or another heard that sound. Little by little the
shuffling feet, the subdued orders, the jar of a stumbling bearer,
drew nearer, became more clear. A gust of wind swept through the hall,
and moaned upwards through the ancient house. The candles on the table
flickered. And still the two sat spell-bound, clasping cold hands, as
the unseen procession passed over the threshold, and for the last time
John Audley came home to sleep amid his books--heedless now of right
or claim, or rank or blood.

                          *   *   *   *   *

A few minutes later Basset entered the parlor. His face betrayed his
fatigue, and his first act was to go to the sideboard and drink a
glass of wine. Mary saw that his hand shook as he raised the glass,
and gratitude for what he had done for her brought the tears to her
eyes. He stood a moment, leaning in utter weariness against the
wall--he had ridden far that day. And Mary had been no woman if she
had not drawn comparisons.

Opportunity had served him, and had not served the other. Nor, had her
betrothed been here, could he have helped her in this pinch. He could
not have taken Basset's place, nor with all the will in the world
could he have done what Basset had done.

That was plain. Yet deep down in her there stirred a faint resentment,
a complaint hardly acknowledged. Audley was not here, but he might
have been. It was his doing that she had not told her uncle, and that
John Audley had passed away in ignorance. It was his doing that in her
trouble she had had to lean on the other. It was not the first time
during the long hours of the day that the thought had come to her; and
though she had put it away, as she put it away now, the opening flower
of love is delicate--the showers pass but leave their mark.

When Etruria had slipped out, and left them, Basset came forward,
and warmed himself at the fire. "Perhaps it is as well you did not go
to bed," he said. "You can go now with an easy mind. It was as I
thought--he lay on the stairs of the Great House and he had been dead
many hours. Dr. Pepper will tell us more to-morrow, but I have no
doubt that he died of syncope brought on by exertion. Toft had tried
to give him brandy."

Shocked and grieved, yet sensible of relief, she was silent for a
time. She had known John Audley less than a year, but he had been good
to her in his way and she sorrowed for him. But at least she was freed
from the nightmare which had ridden her all day. Or was she? "May I
know what took him there?" she asked in a low voice. "And Toft?"

"He believed that there were papers in the Great House, which would
prove his claim. It was an obsession. He asked me more than once to go
with him and search for them, and I refused. He fell back on Toft.
They had begun to search--so Toft tells me--when Mr. Audley was taken
ill. Before he could get him down the stairs, the end came. He sank
down and died."

With a shudder Mary pictured the scene in the empty house. She saw the
light of the lantern fall on the huddled group, as the panic-stricken
servant strove to pour brandy between the lips of the dying man; and
truly she was thankful that in this strait she had Basset to support
her, to assist her, to advise her! "It is very dreadful," she said. "I
do not wonder that Toft gave way. But had he--had my uncle--any right
to be there?"

"In his opinion, yes. And if the papers were there, they were his
papers, the house was his, all was his. In my opinion he was wrong.
But if he believed anything, he believed that he was justified in what
he did."

"I am glad of that!"

"There must be an inquest, I am afraid," Basset continued. "One or two
will know, and one or two more will guess what Mr. Audley's errand
was. But Lord Audley will have nothing to gain by moving in it. And if
only for your sake--but you must go to bed. Etruria is waiting in the
hall. I will send her to you. Good-night."

She stood up. She wished to thank him, she longed to say something,
anything, which would convey to him what his coming had been to her.
But she could not find words, she was tongue-tied. And Etruria came
in.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                        THE NEWS FROM RIDDSLEY


The business which had taken Audley away on the morrow of his
engagement had been no mere pretext. The crisis in political life
which Peel's return to office had brought about was one of those
upheavals which are of rare promise to the adventurous. The wise
foresaw that the party which Sir Robert had led would be riven from
top to bottom. Old allies would be flung into opposing camps, and
would be reaching out every way for support. New men would be learning
their value, and to those who dared, all things might be added.
Places, prizes, honors, all might be the reward of those who knew how
to choose their side with prudence and to support it with courage. The
clubs were like hives of bees. All day long and far into the winter
night Pall Mall roared under the wheels of carriages. About the doors
of Whitehall Gardens, where Peel lived, men gathered like vultures
about the prey. And, lo, in a twinkling and as by magic the
Conservative party vanished in a cloud of dust, to reappear a few days
later in the guise of Peelites and Protectionists--Siamese twins, who
would not live together, and could not live apart.

At such a time it was Audley's first interest to be as near as
possible to the hub of things and to place himself in evidence as a
man concerned. He had a little influence in the Foreign Office, he had
his vote in the House of Lords. And though he did not think that these
would suffice, he trusted that, reinforced by the belief that he
carried the seat at Riddsley in his pocket, they might be worth
something to him.

Unfortunately he could deal with one side only. If Stubbs were right
he could pass for the owner of the borough only as long as he opposed
Sir Robert. He could return the younger Mottisfont and have the credit
of returning him, in the landed interest; but however much it might
suit his book--and it was of that book he was thinking as he travelled
to Lord Seabourne's--he could not, if Stubbs were right, return a
member in the other interest.

Now when a man can sell to one party only, tact is needed if he is to
make a good bargain. Audley saw this. But he knew his own qualities
and he did not despair. The occasion was unique, and he thought that
it would be odd if he could not pluck from the confusion something
worth having; some place under the Foreign Office, a minor embassy, a
mission, something worth two, or three, or even four thousand a year.

He travelled up to town thinking steadily of the course he would
pursue, and telling himself that he must be as cunning as the serpent
and as gentle as the dove. He must let no whip cajole him, and no Tory
browbeat him. For he had only this to look to now: a rich marriage was
no longer among the possibilities. Not that he regretted his decision
in that matter as yet, but at times he wondered at it. He told himself
that he had been impulsive, and setting this down to the charms of his
mistress he gave himself credit for disinterested motives. And then,
too, he had made himself safe!

Still there were difficulties in the way of his ambition, which
appeared more clearly at Seabourne Castle, where Lady Adela was a
fellow-guest, and in London than at Riddsley; difficulties of shrewd
whips, who knew the history of the borough by heart, and had figures
at their fingers' ends; difficulties of arrogant leaders, who talked
of his duty to the land and assumed that duty was its own reward.
Above all, there was the difficulty that he could only sell to the
party that was out of office and must pay in promises--bills drawn at
long dates and for which no discounters could be found. For who could
say when the landed interest, made up of stupid bull-headed men like
Lord George Bentinck and Stubbs, a party without a leader and with
divided counsels, would be in power? They were a mob rather than a
party, and like every other mob were ready to sacrifice future
prospects to present revenge.

That was a terrible difficulty, and his lordship did not see how he
was to get over it. To the Peelites who could pay, cash down, in
honors and places, he could not sell. Nor to the Liberals under little
Lord John, though to their promises some prospect of office gave
value. So that at times he almost despaired. For he had only this to
look to now; if he failed in this he would have love and he would have
Mary, and he would have safety, but very little besides. If his word
had not been given to Mary, he might almost have reconsidered the
matter.

The die was cast, however. Yet many a man has believed this, and then
one fine morning he has begun to wonder if it is so--the cast was such
an unlucky, if not an unfair one! And presently he has seen that at
the cost of a little pride, or a little consistency, or what not, he
might call the game drawn. That is, he might--if he were not the soul
of honor that he is!

By and by under the stress of circumstances his lordship began to
consider that point. He did not draw back, he did not propose to draw
back; but he thought that he would keep the door behind him ajar. To
begin with, he did not overwhelm Mary with letters--his public
engagements were so many; and when he wrote he wrote on ordinary
matters. His pen ran more glibly on party gossip than on their joint
future; he wrote as he might have written to a cousin rather than to
his sweetheart. But he told himself that Mary was not versed in love
letters, nor very passionate. She would expect no more.

Then one fine morning he had a letter from Stubbs, which told him that
there was to be a real contest in Riddsley, that the Horn and Corn
platform was to be challenged, and that the assailant was Peter
Basset. Stubbs added that the Working Men's Institute was beside
itself with joy, that Hatton's and Banfield's hands were solid for
repeal, and that the fight would be real, but that the issue was a
foregone conclusion.

The news was not altogether unwelcome. The contest gave value to the
seat, and increased my lord's claim; on that party, unfortunately,
they could only pay in promises. It also tickled my lord's vanity. His
rival, unhorsed in the lists of love, had betaken himself, it seemed,
to other lists, in which he would as surely be beaten.

"Poor beggar!" Audley thought. "He was always a day late! Always came
in second! I don't know that I ever knew anything more like him than
this! From the day I first saw him, standing behind John Audley's
counsel at the suit, right to this day, he has always been a loser!"

And he smiled as he recalled the poor figure Basset had cut as a
squire of dames.

A week later Stubbs wrote again, and this time his news was startling.
John Audley was dead. Stubbs wrote in the first alarm of the
discovery, word of which had just been brought into the town. He knew
no particulars, but thought that his lordship should be among the
first to learn the fact. He added a hasty postscript, in which he said
that Mr. Basset was proving himself a stronger candidate than either
side had expected, and that not only were the brass-workers with him
but a few of the smaller fry of tradesmen, caught by his cry of cheap
bread. Stubbs closed, however, with the assurance that the landed
interest would carry it by a solid majority.

"D--n their impudence!" Lord Audley exclaimed. And after that he gave
no further heed to the postscript. As long as the issue was certain,
the election was Mottisfont's and Stubbs's affair. As for Basset, the
more money he chose to waste the better.

But John Audley's death was news--it was great news! So he was gone at
last--the man whom he had always regarded as a menace! Whom he had
feared, whose very name had rung mischief in his ears, by whom, during
many a sleepless night, he had seen himself ousted from all that he
had gained from title, income, lands, position! He was gone at last;
and gone with him were the menace, the danger, the night alarms, the
whole pile of gloomy fancies which apprehension had built up!

The relief was immense. Audley read the letter twice, and it seemed to
him that a weight was lifted from him. John Audley was dead. In his
dressing-gown and smoking-cap my lord paced his rooms at the Albany
and said again and again, "He's dead! By gad, he's dead!" Later, he
could not refrain from the thought that if the death had taken place a
few weeks earlier, in that first attack, he would have been under no
temptation to make himself safe. As it was--but he did not pursue the
thought. He only reflected that he had followed love handsomely!

A day later a third letter came from Stubbs, and one from Mary. The
tidings they brought were such that my lord's face fell as he read
them, and he swore more than once over them. John Audley, the lawyer
wrote, had been found dead in the Great House. He had been found lying
on the stairs, a lantern beside him. Stubbs had visited the house the
moment the facts became known. He had examined the muniment room and
found part of the wall broken down, and in the room two boxes of
papers which had been taken from a recess which the breach had
disclosed. One of the boxes had been broken open. At present Stubbs
could only say that the papers had been disturbed, he could not say
whether any were missing. He begged his lordship--he was much
disturbed, it was clear--to come down as quickly as possible. In the
meantime, he would go through the papers and prepare a report. They
appeared to be family documents, old, and not hitherto known to his
lordship's advisers.

Audley was still swearing, when his man came in. "Will you wear the
black velvet vest, my lord?" he asked, "or the flowered satin?"

"Go to the devil!" his master cried--so furiously that the man fled
without more.

When he was gone Audley read the letter again, and came to the
conclusion that in making himself safe he had builded more wisely than
he knew. For who could say what John Audley had found? Or who, through
those papers, had a hold on him? He remembered the manservant's visit,
and the thing looked black. Very black. Alive or dead, John Audley
threatened him.

Then he felt bitterly angry with Stubbs. There had been the most
shocking carelessness. Had he not himself pointed out what was going
on? Had he not put it to Stubbs that the place should be guarded? But
the lawyer, stubborn in his belief that there were no papers there,
had done nothing. Nothing! And this had come of it! This which might
spell ruin!

Or, no. Stubbs had indeed done his best to ruin him, but he had saved
himself. He turned with relief to Mary's letter.

It was written sadly, and it was rather cold. He noticed this, but her
tone did not alarm him, because he set it down to the reserve of his
own letters.

He took care to answer this letter, however, by that day's post, and
he wrote more affectionately than before--as if her trouble had broken
down a reserve natural to him. He wrote with tact, too. He could not
attend the funeral; the dead man's feelings towards him forbade that
he should. But his agent would attend, and his carriage and servants.
When he had written the letter he was satisfied with it: more than
satisfied when he had added a phrase implying that their happiness
would not long be postponed.

After he had posted the letter he wondered if she would expect him to
come to her. It was a lonely house and with death in it--but no, in
the circumstances it was not possible. He would go down to The
Butterflies next day. That would be the most that could be expected of
him. He would be at hand if she needed anything.

But when the next day came he did not go. A letter from a man
belonging to the inner circle of politics reached him. The great man,
who had been and might be again in the Cabinet, suggested a meeting.
Nothing came of the meeting--it was one of those will-of-the-wisps
that draw the unwary on until they find themselves committed. But it
kept Audley in London, and it was not until the evening of Monday, the
day of the funeral, that, chilled and out of temper, after posting the
last stage from Stafford, he reached his quarters at The Butterflies,
and gave short answers to Mrs. Jenkinson's inquiries after his health.

"Poor dear young man!" she said, when she rejoined her sisters. "He
has a kind heart and he feels it. Mr. John was Mr. John, and odd, very
odd. But still he was an Audley!"




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                           THE AUDLEY BIBLE


Angry with Stubbs as he was--and with some reason--Lord Audley was
not the man to bite off his nose to spite his face. He pondered long
what he would say to him, and more than once he rehearsed the scene,
toning down this phrase and pruning that. For he knew that after all
Stubbs was a good agent. He was honest, he thought much and made much
of the property, and nothing would be gained by changing him. Then his
influence in the borough was such that even if my lord quarrelled with
him, Mottisfont would hardly venture to discard him.

For these reasons Audley had no mind to break with his agent. But he
did wish to punish him. He did wish to make his displeasure felt. And
he wished this the more because he began to suspect that if Stubbs had
been less bigoted, he might have carried the borough the way he
wished--the way that would pay him best.

Stubbs on his side foresaw an unpleasant quarter of an hour. He had
been too easy. He had paid too little heed to John Audley's
trespasses, and had let things pass that he should have stopped. Then,
too, he had been over-positive that there were no more documents at
the Great House. Evil had not come of this, but it might have; and he
made up his mind to hear some hard words.

But when he obeyed my lord's summons his reception tried his patience.
A bright fire burned in the grate, half a dozen wax candles shed a
softened light on the room. The wine stood at Audley's elbow, and his
glass was half full. But he did not give Stubbs even two fingers, nor
did he ask him to take wine. And his tone was colder than Stubbs had
ever known it. He made it plain that he was receiving a servant, and a
servant with whom he was displeased.

Still he was Lord Audley, something of divine right survived in him,
and Stubbs knew that he had been himself in the wrong. He took the
bull by the horns. "You are displeased, my lord," he said, as he took
the seat to which the other pointed. "And I admit with some cause. I
have been mistaken and, perhaps, a little remiss! But it is the
exception, and it will be a lesson to me. I am sorry, my lord," he
added frankly. "I can say no more than that."

"And much good that will do us," my lord growled, "in certain events,
Mr. Stubbs!"

"At any rate it will be a sharp lesson to me," Stubbs replied. "It has
cost Mr. Audley his life."

"He had no right to be there!"

"No, my lord, he had no right to be there. But he would not have been
there if I had seen that the place was properly secured. I take all
the blame."

"Unfortunately," the other flung at him contemptuously, "you cannot
pay the penalty; that may fall upon me. Anyway, it was a d--d silly
thing, Mr. Stubbs, to leave the place open, and you see what has come
of it."

"I cannot deny it, my lord," Stubbs said patiently. "But I hope that
nothing will come of it. I will tell your lordship first what my own
observations were. I made a careful examination of the two chests of
papers and I came to the conclusion that Mr. Audley had done little
more than open the first when he was taken ill. One chest showed some
disturbance. The upper layer had been taken out and replaced. The
other box had not been opened."

"What if he found what he wanted and searched no further?" Audley
asked grimly. "But the point of the matter does not lie there. It lies
in another direction, as I should have thought any lawyer would see."

"My lord?"

"Who was with him?" Lord Audley rapped the table with his fingers.
"That's the point, sir! Who was with him?"

"I think I have ascertained that," Stubbs replied, less put out than
his employer expected. "I have little doubt that his man-servant, a
man called Toft, was with him."

"Ha!" the other exclaimed, "I expected that!"

Stubbs raised his eyebrows. "You know him, my lord?"

"I know him for a d--d blackmailing villain!" Audley broke out. Then
he remembered himself. He had not told Stubbs of the blackmailing.
And, after all, what did it matter? He had made himself safe. Whatever
papers he had found, John Audley was dead, and John Audley's heiress
was going to be his wife! The danger to him was naught, and the
blackmailer was already disarmed. Still he was not going to spare
Stubbs by telling him that. Instead, "What did the boxes contain?" he
asked ungraciously.

"Nothing of any value when I examined them, my lord. Old surrenders,
fines, and recoveries with some ancient terriers. I could find no
document among them that related to the title."

"That may be," Audley retorted. "But John Audley expected to find
something that related to the title! He knew more than we knew. He
knew that those boxes existed, and he knew what he expected to find in
them."

"No doubt. And if your lordship had given me a little more time I
should have explained before this that he was disappointed in his
expectation; nay, more, that it was that disappointment--as I have
little doubt--that caused his collapse and death."

"How the devil do you know that?"

"If your lordship will have patience I will explain," Stubbs said, a
gleam of malice in his eyes. He rose from his seat and took from a
chair beside the door a parcel which he had laid there on his
entrance. "I have here that which he found, and that which I don't
doubt caused his death."

"The deuce you have!" Audley cried, rising to his feet in his
surprise. And he watched with all his eyes while the lawyer slowly
untied the tape and spread wide the wrappers. The action disclosed a
thick quarto volume bound in blue leather, sprinkled on the sides with
silver butterflies, and stamped with the arms of Audley. "Good G--d!"
Audley continued, "the Family Bible!"

"Yes, the Family Bible," the lawyer answered, gazing at it
complacently, "about which there was so much talk at the opening of
the suit. It was identified by a score of references, called for by
both sides, sought for high and low, and never produced!"

"And here it is!"

"Here it is. Apparently at some time or other it went out of fashion,
was laid aside and lost sight of, and eventually bricked up with a
mass of old and valueless papers."

Audley steadied his voice with difficulty. "And what is its effect?"
he asked.

"Its effect, my lord, is to corroborate our case in every particular,"
the lawyer answered proudly. "Its entries form a history of the family
for a long period, and amongst them is an entry of the marriage of
Peter Paravicini Audley on the date alleged by us; an entry made in
the handwriting of his father, and one of eleven made by the same
hand. This entry agrees in every particular with the suspected
statement in the register which we support, and fully bears out our
case."

"And John Audley found that?" my lord cried, after a moment of
pregnant silence. He had regained his composure. His eyes were
shining.

"Yes, and it killed him," Stubbs said gravely. "Doubtless he came on
it at the moment when he thought success was within his grasp, and the
shock was too much for him."

"Good Lord! Good Lord! And how did you get it?"

"From Mr. Basset."

"Basset?"

"Who obtained it, I have no doubt, from the man, Toft, either by
pressure or purchase."

"The rascal! The d--d rascal! He ought to be prosecuted!"

"Possibly," the lawyer agreed. "But he was only an accomplice, and we
could not prosecute him without involving others; without bringing Mr.
John's name into it--and he is dead. As a fact, I have passed my word
to Mr. Basset that no steps should be taken against him, and I think
your lordship will agree with me that I could not do otherwise."

"Still--the man ought to be punished!"

"He ought, but if any one has paid for his silence or for this book,
it is not we."

After that there was a little more talk about the Bible, which my lord
examined with curiosity, about the singularity of its discovery, about
the handwriting of the entries, which the lawyer said he could himself
prove. Stubbs was made free of the decanter, and of everything but my
lord's mind. For Audley said nothing of his engagement to Mary--the
moment was hardly opportune; and nothing--it was too late in the
day--of Toft's former exploit. He stood awhile absorbed and dreaming,
staring through the haze of the candles. Here at last was final and
complete relief. No more fears, no more calculations. Here was an end
at last of the feeling that there was a mine under him. Traditions,
when they are bred in the bone, die slowly, and many a time he had
been hard put to it to resist the belief, so long whispered, that his
branch was illegitimate. At last the tradition was dead. There was no
more need to play for safety. What he had he had, and no one could
take it from him.

And presently the talk passed to the election.

"There's no doubt," Stubbs said, "that Mr. Basset is a stronger
candidate than either side expected."

"But he's no politician! He has no experience!"

The lawyer sat forward, with his legs apart and a hand on either knee.
"No," he said. "But the truth is, though it is beyond me how a
gentleman of his birth can be so misled, he believes what he says--and
it goes down!"

"Is he a speaker?"

"He is and he isn't! I slipped in myself one night at the back of one
of the new-fangled meetings his precious League has started. I wanted
to see, my lord, if any of our people were there. I heard him for ten
minutes, and at the start he was so jumpy I thought that he would
break down. But when he got going--well, I saw how it was and what
took the people. He believes what he says, and he says it plain. The
way he painted Peel giving up everything, sacrificing himself,
sacrificing his party, sacrificing his reputation, sacrificing all to
do what he thought was right--the devil himself wouldn't have known
his own!"

"He almost converted you?"

The lawyer laughed disdainfully. "Not a jot!" he said. "But I saw that
he would convert some. Not many," Stubbs continued complacently.
"There's some that mean to, but will think better of it at the last.
And some would but daren't! Two or three may. Still, he's such a
candidate as we've not had against us before, my lord. And with cheap
bread and the preachings of this plaguy League--I shall be glad when
it is over."

Audley rose and poked the fire. "You're not going to tell me," he
said, in a voice that was unnaturally even, "that he's going to beat
us? You're not going, after all the assurances you've given me----"

"God forbid," Stubbs replied. "No, no, my lord! Mr. Mottisfont will
hold the seat! I mean only that it will be a nearer thing--a nearer
thing than it has been."

He had no idea that his patron was fighting a new spasm of anger; that
the thought that he might, after all, have dealt with Sir Robert, the
thought that he might, after all, have bargained with the party in
power, was almost too much for the other's self-command. It was too
late now, of course. It was too late. But if the contest was to be so
close, surely if he had cast his weight on the other side, he might
have carried it!

And what if the seat were lost? Then this stubborn, confident fool,
who was as bigoted in his faith as the narrowest Leaguer of them all,
had done him a deadly injury! My lord bit off an oath, and young as he
was, his face wore a very apoplectic look as he turned round, after
laying down the poker.

"That reminds me," the lawyer resumed, blandly unconscious of the
crisis, and of the other's anger. "I meant to ask your lordship what's
to be done about the two Boshams. You remember them, my lord? They've
had the small holding by the bridge with the water meadow time out of
mind--for seven generations they say. They pay eighteen pounds as
joint tenants, and have votes as old freemen."

"What of them?" the other asked impatiently.

"Well, I'm afraid they'll not support us."

"Do you mean that they'll not vote for Mottisfont?"

"I'm afraid not," Stubbs answered. "They're as stubborn as their own
pigs! I've spoken to them myself and told them that they've only one
thing to expect if they go against their landlord."

"And that is, to go out!" Audley said. "Well, make that quite clear to
them, Stubbs, and depend upon it--they'll see differently."

"I'm afraid they won't, my lord, and that is why I trouble you. They
voted against the last lord--twice, I am told--and the story goes that
he laid his stick about Ben Bosham's shoulders in the street--that
would be in '31, I fancy. But he didn't turn them out--they'd been in
the holding so long."

"Two votes may have been nothing to him," Audley replied coldly. "They
are something to me. They will vote for Mottisfont or they will go,
Stubbs. That is flat, and do you see to it. There, I'm tired now," he
continued, rising from his seat.

Stubbs rose. "I don't know if your lordship's heard about Mr. John's
will!"

"No!" My lord straightened himself. Earlier in the day he had given
some thought to this, and had weighed Mary Audley's chances of
inheriting what John Audley had. "No!" he said. And he waited.

"He has left the young lady eight thousand pounds."

"Eight thousand!" Audley ejaculated. "Do you mean--he must have had
more than that? He wasted a small fortune in that confounded suit. But
he must have had--four times that, man!"

"The residue goes to Mr. Basset."

"Basset!" Audley cried, his face flushed with passion. "To Basset?" he
repeated. "Good G--d!"

"So I'm told, my lord," the lawyer answered, staggered by the temper
in which his employer received the news.

"But Miss Audley was his own niece! Basset? He was no relation to
him!"

"They were very old friends."

"That's no reason why he should leave him thirty thousand pounds of
Audley money! Money taken straight out of the Audley property! Thirty
thousand----"

"Not thirty, my lord," Stubbs ventured. "Not much above twenty, I
should say. If you put it----"

"If I put it that you were--something of a fool at times," the angry
man cried, "I shouldn't be far wrong! But there, there, never mind!
Good-night! Can't you see I'm dead tired and hardly know what I am
saying? Come to-morrow! Come at eleven in the morning."

Stubbs hardly knew how to take it. But after a moment's hesitation, he
made the best of the apology, muttered something, and got out of the
room. On the stairs he relieved his feelings by a word or two. In the
street he wondered what had taken the man so suddenly. Surely he had
not expected to get the money!




                             CHAPTER XXX

                           A FRIEND IN NEED


Basset had obtained the missing Bible very much in the way the lawyer
had indicated--partly by purchase and partly by pressure. Shocked as
Toft had been by his master's sudden death, he had had the presence of
mind to remember that he might make something of what they had
discovered could he secrete it; and with every nerve quivering the man
had fought down panic until he had hidden the parcel which had caused
John Audley's collapse. Then he had given way. He had turned his back
on the Great House, and shuddering, clutched at by grisly hands,
pursued by phantom feet, he had fled through the night and the Yew
Walk, to hide, for the present at least, his part in the tragedy.

Basset, however, had known too much for him, and the servant, shaken
by what had happened, had not been able to persist in his denials. But
to tell and to give were two things, and it is doubtful whether he
would have released his plunder if Basset had not in the last resort
disclosed to him Miss Audley's engagement to her cousin.

The change which this news wrought in Toft had astonished Basset. The
man had gone down under it as under a blow on the head. The spirit had
gone out of him, and he had taken with thankfulness the sum which
Basset, as John Audley's representative, had offered him--rather out
of pity than because it seemed necessary. He had given up the parcel
on the night before the funeral.

The book in his hands, Basset had hastened to be rid of it. Cynically
he had told himself that he did so, lest he too might give way to the
ignoble impulse to withhold it. Audley was his rival, but that he
might have forgiven, as men forgive great wrongs and in time smile on
their enemies. But the little wrongs, who can forgive these--the
slight, the sneer, the assumption of superiority, the upper hand
lightly taken and insolently held?

Not Peter Basset, at a moment when he was being tried almost beyond
bearing. For every day, between the finding of the body and the
funeral, and often more than once in the day he had to see Mary, he
had to advise her, he had--for there was no one else--to explain
matters to her, to bear her company. He had to quit this meeting and
that Ordinary--for election business stops for no man--and to go to
her. He had to find her alone and to see her face light up at his
entrance; he had to look back, and to see her watch him as he rode
from the door. Nor when he was absent from the Gatehouse was it any
better; nay, it was worse. For then he was forced to think of her as
alone and sad, he had to picture her brooding over the fire, he had to
fancy her at her solitary meals. And alike, with her or away from her,
he had to damp down the old passion, as well as the new regret that
each day and each hour and every kind look on her part fanned into a
flame. Nor was even this all; every day he saw that she grew more
grave, daily he saw her color fading, and he did not know what qualms
she masked, what nightmares she might be suffering in that empty
house--nay, what cause for unhappiness she might be hiding. At
last--it was the afternoon before the funeral--he could bear it no
longer, and he spoke.

"You ought not to be here!" he said bluntly. "Why doesn't Audley fetch
you away?" He was standing before the fire drawing on his gloves as he
prepared to leave. The room was full of shadows, for he had chosen a
time when she could not see his face.

She tried to fence with him. "I am afraid," she said, "that some
formalities will be necessary before he can do that."

"Then why is he not here?" he retorted. "Or why doesn't he send some
one to be with you? You ought not to be alone. Mrs. Jenkinson at The
Butterflies--she's a good soul--you know her?"

"Yes."

"She'd come at a word. I know it's not my business----"

"Or you would go about it, I am sure," she replied gently, "with as
much respect to my wishes as Lord Audley shows."

"Your wishes? But why--why do you wish----"

"Why do I wish to be alone?" she answered. "Because I owe something to
my uncle. Because I owe him a little thought and some remembrance. He
made my old life for me--would you have me begin the new one before he
is in the grave? This was his house--would you have me entertain Lord
Audley in it?" She stood up, slender and straight, with the table
between them--and he did not guess that her knees were trembling.
"Please to understand," she continued, "that Lord Audley and I are
entirely at one in this. We have our lives before us, and it were
indeed selfish of us, and ungrateful of me, if we grudged a few days
to remembrance. As selfish," she continued bravely--and he did not
know that she braced herself anew--"as if I were ever to forget the
friend who was _his_ friend, whose kindness has never failed me, whose
loyalty has never--" she broke down there. She could not go on.

"Add, too," he said gruffly, "who has robbed you of the greater part
of your inheritance! Don't forget that!" He had been explaining the
effect of John Audley's will to her. It had been opened that morning.

His roughness helped her to recover herself. "I do not know what you
mean by 'inheritance,'" she said. "My uncle has left me the portion
his wife brought to him. I am more than satisfied. I am very grateful.
My only fear is that, had he known of my engagement, he would not have
wished me to have this."

"The will was made before you came to live here," Basset said. "The
eight thousand was left to you because you were his brother's child.
It was the least he could do for you, and had he made a new will he
would doubtless have increased it. But," breaking off, "I must be
going." Yet he still stood, and he still tapped the table with the
end of his riding-crop. "When is Audley coming?" he asked suddenly.
"To-morrow?"

"Yes, to-morrow."

