claiming acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up
Grisha into the carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan
Arkadyevitch had brought with him.

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind.  He was
rather vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked
more and more the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of
this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous
person.  He seemed to him still more uncongenial and superfluous
when, on approaching the steps where the whole party, children
and grown-up, were gathered together in much excitement, Levin
saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm and gallant air,
kissing Kitty's hand.

"Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said
Vassenka Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin's hand with great
warmth.

"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Levin, hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings.
"We've come with the most savage intentions.  Why, maman, they've
not been in Moscow since!  Look, Tanya, here's something for you!
Get it, please, it's in the carriage, behind!" he talked in all
directions.  "How pretty you've grown, Dolly," he said to his
wife, once more kissing her hand, holding it in one of his, and
patting it with the other.

Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of
mind, now looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased
him.

"Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?" he thought,
looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch's tender demonstrations to his
wife.  He looked at Dolly, and he did not like her either.

"She doesn't believe in his love.  So what is she so pleased
about?  Revolting!" thought Levin.

He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute
before, and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this
Vassenka, with his ribbons, just as though she were in her own
house.

Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps,
seemed to him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which
he met Stepan Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother
neither liked nor respected Oblonsky.

And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air _sainte
nitouche_ making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all
the while she was thinking of nothing but getting married.

And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the
tone of gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in
the country, as though it were a holiday for himself and everyone
else.  And, above all, unpleasant was that particular smile with
which she responded to his smile.

Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as
they were all seated, Levin turned and went out.

Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband.  She tried to
seize a moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get
away from her, saying he was wanted at the counting-house.  It
was long since his own work on the estate had seemed to him so
important as at that moment.  "It's all holiday for them," he
thought; "but these are no holiday matters, they won't wait, and
there's no living without them."


Chapter 7


Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper.  On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"But why are you making all this fuss?  Have what we usually do."

"No, Stiva doesn't drink...Kostya, stop, what's the matter?"
Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to
the dining room without waiting for her, and at once joined in
the lively general conversation which was being maintained there
by Vassenka Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Please, do let's go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair,
where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.

"I shall be delighted, we will go.  And have you had any shooting
yet this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his
leg, but speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so
well in him, and that was so out of keeping with him.  "I can't
answer for our finding grouse, but there are plenty of snipe.
Only we ought to start early.  You're not tired?  Aren't you
tired, Stiva?"

"Me tired?  I've never been tired yet.  Suppose we stay up all
night.  Let's go for a walk!"

"Yes, really, let's not go to bed at all!  Capital!" Veslovsky
chimed in.

"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people
up too," Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony
in her voice which she almost always had now with her husband.
"But to my thinking, it's time for bed now....  I'm going, I
don't want supper."

"No, do stay a little, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going
round to her side behind the table where they were having supper.
"I've so much still to tell you."

"Nothing really, I suppose."

"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna's, and he's going to them
again?  You know they're hardly fifty miles from you, and I too
must certainly go over there.  Veslovsky, come here!"

Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.

"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her?  How was she?"
Darya Alexandrovna appealed to him.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never
pausing in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw
that there was an eager and mysterious conversation going on
between Stepan Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky.  And
that was not all.  He saw on his wife's face an expression of
real feeling as she gazed with fixed eyes on the handsome face of
Vassenka, who was telling them something with great animation.

"It's exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling
them about Vronsky and Anna.  "I can't, of course, take it upon
myself to judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of
home."

"What do they intend doing?"

"I believe they think of going to Moscow."

"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together!
When are you going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.

"I'm spending July there."

"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.

"I've been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said
Dolly.  "I am sorry for her, and I know her.  She's a splendid
woman.  I will go alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in
no one's way.  And it will be better indeed without you."

"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "And you, Kitty?"

"I?  Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she
glanced round at her husband.

"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her.  "She's
a very fascinating woman."

"Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more.  She got up
and walked across to her husband.

"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.

His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush
that had overspread her cheeks while she was talking to
Veslovsky, gone far indeed.  Now as he heard her words, he
construed them in his own fashion.  Strange as it was to him
afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the moment clear
that in asking whether he was going shooting, all she cared to
know was whether he would give that pleasure to Vassenka
Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.

"Yes, I'm going," he answered her in an unnatural voice,
disagreeable to himself.

"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won't see
anything of her husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty's words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don't
separate me from _him_.  I don't care about _your_ going, but do
let me enjoy the society of this delightful young man."

"Oh, if you wish, we'll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered,
with peculiar amiability.

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence
had occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching
her with smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.

Levin saw that look.  He turned white, and for a minute he could
hardly breathe.  "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the
feeling that boiled within him.

"Tomorrow, then?  Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting
down on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.

Levin's jealousy went further still.  Already he saw himself a
deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply
necessary to provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of
life....  But in spite of that he made polite and hospitable
inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun, and his boots,
and agreed to go shooting next day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by
getting up herself and advising Kitty to go to bed.  But even at
this point Levin could not escape another agony.  As he said
good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again have kissed her
hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew back her hand and said with a
na√Øve bluntness, for which the old princess scolded her
afterwards:

"We don't like that fashion."

In Levin's eyes she was to blame for having allowed such
relations to arise, and still more to blame for showing so
awkwardly that she did not like them.

"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
who, after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in
his most charming and sentimental humor.  "Look, Kitty," he said,
pointing to the moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees
--"how exquisite!  Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade.
You know, he has a splendid voice; we practiced songs together
along the road.  He has brought some lovely songs with him, two
new ones.  Varvara Andreevna and he must sing some duets."

When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long
while about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be
heard singing one of the new songs.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his
wife's bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she
asked him what was wrong.  But when at last with a timid glance
she hazarded the question: "Was there perhaps something you
disliked about Veslovsky?"--it all burst out, and he told her
all.  He was humiliated himself at what he was saying, and that
exasperated him all the more.

He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his
scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest,
as though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in.  The
expression of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if
it had not at the same time had a look of suffering which touched
her.  His jaws were twitching, and his voice kept breaking.

"You must understand that I'm not jealous, that's a nasty word.
I can't be jealous, and believe that....  I can't say what I
feel, but this is awful....  I'm not jealous, but I'm wounded,
humiliated that anybody  dare think, that anybody dare look at
you with eyes like that."

"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as
possible to recall every word and gesture of that evening and
every shade implied in them.

At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been
something precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after
her to the other end of the table; but she dared not own it even
to herself, and would have been even more unable to bring herself
to say so to him, and so increase his suffering.

"And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am
now?..."

"Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "you shouldn't say
that!...  If you had been attractive then..."

"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said,
looking at him with an expression of pained commiseration.  "Why,
what can you be thinking about!  When for me there's no one in
the world, no one, no one!...  Would you like me never to see
anyone?"

For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she
was angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent,
should be forbidden her; but now she would readily have
sacrificed, not merely such trifles, but everything, for his
peace of mind, to save him from the agony he was suffering.

"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he
went on in a desperate whisper; "that he's in my house, that he's
done nothing improper positively except his free and easy airs
and the way he sits on his legs.  He thinks it's the best
possible form, and so I'm obliged to be civil to him."

"But, Kostya, you're exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of
her heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now
in his jealousy.

"The most awful part of it all is that you're just as you always
are, and especially now when to me you're something sacred, and
we're so happy, so particularly happy--and all of a sudden a
little wretch....  He's not a little wretch; why should I abuse
him?  I have nothing to do with him.  But why should my, and
your, happiness..."

"Do you know, I understand now what it's all come from," Kitty
was beginning.

"Well, what? what?"

"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."

"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.

She told him what they had been talking about.  And as she told
him, she was breathless with emotion.  Levin was silent for a
space, then he scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly
he clutched at his head.

"Katya, I've been worrying you!  Darling, forgive me!  It's
madness!  Katya, I'm a criminal.  And how could you be so
distressed at such idiocy?"

"Oh, I was sorry for you."

"For me? for me?  How mad I am!...  But why make you miserable?
It's awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."

"It's humiliating too, of course."

"Oh, then I'll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm
him with civility," said Levin, kissing her hands.  "You shall
see.  Tomorrow....  Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."


Chapter 8


Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for
the shooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early
morning that they were going shooting, after much whining and
darting to and fro, had sat herself down in the wagonette beside
the coachman, and, disapproving of the delay, was excitedly
watching the door from which the sportsmen still did not come
out.  The first to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high
boots that reached half-way up his thick thighs, in a green
blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in his
Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a
sling.  Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked
him in her own way whether the others were coming soon, but
getting no answer from him, she returned to her post of
observation and sank into repose again, her head on one side, and
one ear pricked up to listen.  At last the door opened with a
creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew
out, running round and round and turning over in the air.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar
in his mouth.

"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to the dog,
who put his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in
torn trousers and a short coat.  On his head there was a wreck of
a hat of indefinite form, but his gun of a new patent was a
perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridge belt, though worn,
were of the very best quality.

Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly
_chic_ for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting
outfit of the best quality.  He saw it now as he looked at Stepan
Arkadyevitch, radiant in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and
joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.  And he made up his mind that
next time he went shooting he would certainly adopt the same
get-up.

"Well, and what about our host?" he asked.

"A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

"Yes, and such a charming one!"

"He came down dressed.  No doubt he's run up to her again."

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right.  Levin had run up again to his
wife to ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy
yesterday, and, moreover, to beg her for Christ's sake to be more
careful.  The great thing was for her to keep away from the
children--they might any minute push against her.  Then he had
once more to hear her declare that she was not angry with him for
going away for two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a
note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write him, if it
were but two words only, to let him know that all was well with
her.

Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple
of days from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure,
looking big and strong in his shooting-boots and his white
blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation and excitement
incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own chagrin for the sake
of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him cheerfully.

"Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out onto the steps.  "Have
you put the lunch in?  Why is the chestnut on the right?  Well,
it doesn't matter.  Laska, down; go and lie down!"

"Put it with the herd of oxen," he said to the herdsman, who was
waiting for him at the steps with some question.  "Excuse me,
here comes another villain."

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken
his seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with
a rule in his hand.

"You didn't come to the counting house yesterday, and now you're
detaining me.  Well, what is it?"

"Would your honor let me make another turning?  It's only three
steps to add.  And we make it just fit at the same time.  It will
be much more convenient."

"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance.
"I said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps.  Now there's
no setting it right.  Do as I told you, and make a new
staircase."

The point was that in the lodge that was being built the
carpenter had spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without
calculating the space it was to fill, so that the steps were all
sloping when it was put in place.  Now the carpenter wanted,
keeping the same staircase, to add three steps.

"It will be much better."

"But where's your staircase coming out with its three steps?"

"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous
smile.  "It comes out right at the very spot.  It starts, so to
speak," he said, with a persuasive gesture; "it comes down, and
comes down, and comes out."

"But three steps will add to the length too...where is it to
come out?"

"Why, to be sure, it'll start from the bottom and go up and go
up, and come out so," the carpenter said obstinately and
convincingly.

"It'll reach the ceiling and the wall."

"Upon my word!  Why, it'll go up, and up, and come out like
this."

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in
the dust.

"There, do you see?"

"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in
his eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last.  "It seems
it'll be best to make a new one."

"Well, then, do it as you're told," Levin shouted, seating
himself in the wagonette.  "Down!  Hold the dogs, Philip!"

Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household
cares such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he
was not disposed to talk.  Besides that, he had that feeling of
concentrated excitement that every sportsman experiences as he
approaches the scene of action.  If he had anything on his mind
at that moment, it was only the doubt whether they would start
anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to
advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he would shoot
well that day himself.  Not to disgrace himself before a new
spectator--not to be outdone by Oblonsky--that too was a thought
that crossed his brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative.
Vassenka Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful
chatter.  As he listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think
how unfair he had been to him the day before.  Vassenka was
really a nice fellow, simple, good-hearted, and very
good-humored.  If Levin had met him before he was married, he
would have made friends with him.  Levin rather disliked his
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption
of elegance.  It was as though he assumed a high degree of
importance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had
long nails and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond;
but this could be forgiven for the sake of his good nature and
good breeding.  Levin liked him for his good education, for
speaking French and English with such an excellent accent, and
for being a man of his world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of
the Don Steppes.  He kept praising him enthusiastically.  "How
fine it must be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse!
Eh? isn't it?" he said.  He had imagined riding on a steppe horse
as something wild and romantic, and it turned out nothing of the
sort.  But his simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his
good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of his movements,
was very attractive.  Either because his nature was sympathetic
to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins of
the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him,
anyway he liked his society.

After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at
once felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know
whether he had lost them or left them on the table.  In the
pocketbook there were thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter
could not be left in uncertainty.

"Do you know what, Levin, I'll gallop home on that left
trace-horse.  That will be splendid.  Eh?" he said, preparing to
get out.

"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka
could hardly weigh less than seventeen stone.  "I'll send the
coachman."

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself
drove the remaining pair.


Chapter 9


"Well, now what's our plan of campaign?  Tell us all about it,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Our plan is this.  Now we're driving to Gvozdyov.  In Gvozdyov
there's a grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come
some magnificent snipe marshes where there are grouse too.  It's
hot now, and we'll get there--it's fifteen miles or so--towards
evening and have some evening shooting; we'll spend the night
there and go on tomorrow to the bigger moors."

"And is there nothing on the way?"

"Yes; but we'll reserve ourselves; besides it's hot.  There are
two nice little places, but I doubt there being anything to
shoot."

Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places,
but they were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and
they were only little places--there would hardly be room for
three to shoot.  And so, with some insincerity, he said that he
doubted there being anything to shoot.  When they reached a
little marsh Levin would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch,
with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds
visible from the road.

"Shan't we try that?" he said, pointing to the little marsh.

"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began
begging, and Levin could but consent.

Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the
other into the marsh.

"Krak! Laska!..."

The dogs came back.

"There won't be room for three.  I'll stay here," said Levin,
hoping they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled
by the dogs, and turning over in their flight, were plaintively
wailing over the marsh.

"No!  Come along, Levin, let's go together!" Veslovsky called.

"Really, there's not room.  Laska, back, Laska!  You won't want
another dog, will you?"

Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen.  They walked right across the marsh.  Except little
birds and peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was
nothing in the marsh.

"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh,"
said Levin, "only it's wasting time."

"Oh, no, it was jolly all the same.  Did you see us?" said
Vassenka Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with
his gun and his peewit in his hands.  "How splendidly I shot
this bird!  Didn't I?  Well, shall we soon be getting to the real
place?"

The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against
the stock of someone's gun, and there was the report of a shot.
The gun did actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to
Levin.  It appeared that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one
trigger, and had left the other hammer still cocked.  The charge
flew into the ground without doing harm to anyone.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky.
But Levin had not the heart to reprove him.  In the first place,
any reproach would have seemed to be called forth by the danger
he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin's
forehead.  And besides, Veslovsky was at first so na√Øvely
distressed, and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously
at their general dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.

When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and
would inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to
persuade them to pass it by.  But Veslovsky again overpersuaded
him.  Again, as the marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host,
remained with the carriage.

Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge.  Vassenka Veslovsky
was the first to run after the dog.  Before Stepan Arkadyevitch
had time to come up, a grouse flew out.  Veslovsky missed it and
it flew into an unmown meadow.  This grouse was left for
Veslovsky to follow up.  Krak found it again and pointed, and
Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage.  "Now you go and
I'll stay with the horses," he said.

Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman's envy.  He
handed the reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.

Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful
place that Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.

"Why don't you stop her?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"She won't scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his
bitch's pleasure and hurrying after her.

As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places
there was more and more earnestness in Laska's exploration.  A
little marsh bird did not divert her attention for more than an
instant.  She made one circuit round the clump of reeds, was
beginning a second, and suddenly quivered with excitement and
became motionless.

"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning
to beat more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort
of shutter had been drawn back from his straining ears, all
sounds, confused but loud, began to beat on his hearing, losing
all sense of distance.  He heard the steps of Stepan
Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horses in the
distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he had
trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse.  He heard
too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could
not explain to himself.

Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.

"Fetch it!"

Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog.  Levin had
lifted his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim,
the sound of splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined
with the sound of Veslovsky's voice, shouting something with
strange loudness.  Levin saw he had his gun pointed behind the
snipe, but still he fired.

When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw
the horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.

Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh,
and got the horses stuck in the mud.

"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire.  "What did you drive in for?"
he said to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling
the horses out.

Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his
horses getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that
neither Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the
coachman to unharness the horses and get them out, since neither
of them had the slightest notion of harnessing.  Without
vouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka's protestations that
it had been quite dry there, Levin worked in silence with the
coachman at extricating the horses.  But then, as he got warm at
the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at the
wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed,
Levin blamed himself for having under the influence of
yesterday's feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be
particularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness.  When
everything had been put right, and the carriage had been brought
back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.

"_Bon app√©tit--bonne conscience!  Ce poulet va tomber jusqu'au
fond de mes bottes_," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits,
quoted the French saying as he finished his second chicken.
"Well, now our troubles are over, now everything's going to go
well.  Only, to atone for my sins, I'm bound to sit on the box.
That's so? eh?  No, no!  I'll be your Automedon.  You shall see
how I'll get you along," he answered, not letting go the rein,
when Levin begged him to let the coachman drive.  "No, I must
atone for my sins, and I'm very comfortable on the box."  And he
drove.

Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially
the chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but
unconsciously he fell under the influence of his gaiety and
listened to the songs he sang all the way on the box, or the
descriptions and representations he gave of driving in the
English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the very best of
spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.


Chapter 10


Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh
too early, while it was still hot.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of
their expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could
get rid of Vassenka and be free in his movements.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch evidently had the same desire, and on his face Levin
saw the look of anxiety always present in a true sportsman when
beginning shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness
peculiar to him.

"How shall we go?  It's a splendid marsh, I see, and there are
hawks," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds
hovering over the reeds.  "Where there are hawks, there is sure
to be game."

"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining
the lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see
those reeds?"  He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the
huge half-mown wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of
the river.  "The marsh begins here, straight in front of us, do
you see--where it is greener?  From here it runs to the right
where the horses are; there are breeding places there, and
grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that alder, and right
up to the mill.  Over there, do you see, where the pools are?
That's the best place.  There I once shot seventeen snipe.
We'll separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and
then meet over there at the mill."

"Well, which shall go to left and which to right?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  "It's wider to the right; you two go that way and
I'll take the left," he said with apparent carelessness.

"Capital! we'll make the bigger bag!  Yes, come along, come
along!" Vassenka exclaimed.

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting
about together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool.
Levin knew Laska's method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place
too and expected a whole covey of snipe.

"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice
to his companion splashing in the water behind him.  Levin could
not help feeling an interest in the direction his gun was
pointed, after that casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

"Oh, I won't get in your way, don't trouble about me."

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty's words at
parting: "Mind you don't shoot one another."  The dogs came
nearer and nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own
scent.  The expectation of snipe was so intense that to Levin the
squelching sound of his own heel, as he drew it up out of the
mire, seemed to be the call of a snipe, and he clutched and
pressed the lock of his gun.

"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear.  Vassenka had fired at a
flock of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at
that moment towards the sportsmen, far out of range.  Before
Levin had time to look round, there was the whir of one snipe,
another, a third, and some eight more rose one after another.

Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was
beginning its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into
the mud.  Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying
low in the reeds, and together with the report of the shot, that
snipe too fell, and it could be seen fluttering out where the
sedge had been cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.

Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and
missed; he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that
instant another snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him
so that he missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and
Veslovsky, who had had time to load again, sent two charges of
small-shot into the water.  Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his
snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.

"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
limping on his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and
whistling to his dog, he walked off in one direction.  Levin and
Veslovsky walked in the other.

It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a
failure he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole
day.  So it was that day.  The snipe showed themselves in
numbers.  They kept flying up from just under the dogs, from
under the sportsmen's legs, and Levin might have retrieved his
ill luck.  But the more he shot, the more he felt disgraced in
the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily and
indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest
abashed by his ill success.  Levin, in feverish haste, could not
restrain himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by
shooting almost without a hope of hitting.  Laska, indeed, seemed
to understand this.  She began looking more languidly, and gazed
back at the sportsmen, as it were, with perplexity or reproach in
her eyes.  Shots followed shots in rapid succession.  The smoke
of the powder hung about the sportsmen, while in the great roomy
net of the game bag there were only three light little snipe.
And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and one by
both of them together.  Meanwhile from the other side of the
marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch's shots, not
frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after
each they heard "Krak, Krak, _apporte_!"

This excited Levin still more.  The snipe were floating
continually in the air over the reeds.  Their whirring wings
close to the earth, and their harsh cries high in the air, could
be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen first and flown
up into the air, settled again before the sportsmen.  Instead of
two hawks there were now dozens of them hovering with shrill
cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and
Veslovsky reached the place where the peasants' mowing-grass was
divided into long strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one
place by the trampled grass, in another by a path mown through
it.  Half of these strips had already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut
part as the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to
meet him, and so he walked on with his companion through the cut
and uncut patches.

"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on
an unharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us!  Have a
drop of wine!"

Levin looked round.

"Come along, it's all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking
bearded peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a
grin, and holding up a greenish bottle that flashed in the
sunlight.

"_Qu'est-ce qu'ils disent_?" asked Veslovsky.

"They invite you to have some vodka.  Most likely they've been
dividing the meadow into lots.  I should have some," said Levin,
not without some guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the
vodka, and would go away to them.

"Why do they offer it?"

"Oh, they're merry-making.  Really, you should join them.  You
would be interested."

"_Allons, c'est curieux_."

"You go, you go, you'll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin,
and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky,
bent and stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm's
length, was making his way out of the marsh towards the
peasants.

"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin.  "Never fear!  You
taste our cake!"

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to
eat some bread.  He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to
drag his staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he
hesitated.  But Laska was setting.  And immediately all his
weariness vanished, and he walked lightly through the swamp
towards the dog.  A snipe flew up at his feet; he fired and
killed it.  Laska still pointed.--"Fetch it!"  Another bird flew
up close to the dog.  Levin fired.  But it was an unlucky day for
him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had
shot, he could not find that either.  He wandered all about the
reeds, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent
her to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really.
And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of
his failure, things went no better.  There were plenty of snipe
still, but Levin made one miss after another.

The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked
through with perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full
of water weighed heavily on his leg and squeaked at every step;
the sweat ran in drops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth
was full of the bitter taste, his nose of the smell of powder and
stagnant water, his ears were ringing with the incessant whir of
the snipe; he could not touch the stock of his gun, it was so
hot; his heart beat with short, rapid throbs; his hands shook
with excitement, and his weary legs stumbled and staggered over
the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on and still
he shot.  At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung his gun and
his hat on the ground.

"No, I must control myself," he said to himself.  Picking up his
gun and his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp.
When he got on to dry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and
emptied it, then walked to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting
water, moistened his burning hot gun, and washed his face and
hands.  Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where a snipe
had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.

He tried to be calm, but it was the same again.  His finger
pressed the cock before he had taken a good aim at the bird.  It
got worse and worse.

He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the
marsh towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog.
Krak darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black
all over with the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of
a conqueror sniffed at Laska.  Behind Krak there came into view
in the shade of the alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  He came to meet him, red and perspiring, with
unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the same way.

"Well?  You have been popping away!" he said, smiling
good-humoredly.

"How have you got on?" queried Levin.  But there was no need to
ask, for he had already seen the full game bag.

"Oh, pretty fair."

He had fourteen birds.

"A splendid marsh!  I've no doubt Veslovsky got in your way.
It's awkward too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, to soften his triumph.


Chapter 11


When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant's hut
where Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there.  He
was sitting in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to
the bench from which he was being pulled by a soldier, the
brother of the peasant's wife, who was helping him off with his
miry boots.  Veslovsky was laughing his infectious, good-humored
laugh.

"I've only just come.  _Ils ont √©t√© charmants_.  Just fancy, they
gave me drink, fed me!  Such bread, it was exquisite!  _Delicieux!_
And the vodka, I never tasted any better.  And they would not
take a penny for anything.  And they kept saying: 'Excuse our
homely ways.'"

"What should they take anything for?  They were entertaining you,
to be sure.  Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the
soldier, succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the
blackened stocking.

In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by
their boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the
smell of marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the
absence of knives and forks, the party drank their tea and ate
their supper with a relish only known to sportsmen.  Washed and
clean, they went into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the
coachman had been making up beds for the gentlemen.

Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.

After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of
dogs, and of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on
a topic that interested all of them.  After Vassenka had several
times over expressed his appreciation of this delightful
sleeping place among the fragrant hay, this delightful broken
cart (he supposed it to be broken because the shafts had been
taken out), of the good nature of the peasants that had treated
him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of their respective
masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shooting
party at Malthus's, where he had stayed the previous summer.

Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by
speculation in railway shares.  Stepan Arkadyevitch described
what grouse moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province,
and how they were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in
which the shooting party had been driven, and the luncheon
pavilion that had been rigged up at the marsh.

"I don't understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how
is it such people don't disgust you?  I can understand a lunch
with Lafitte is all very pleasant, but don't you dislike just
that very sumptuousness?  All these people, just like our spirit
monopolists in old days, get their money in a way that gains them
the contempt of everyone.  They don't care for their contempt,
and then they use their dishonest gains to buy off the contempt
they have deserved."

"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky.  "Perfectly!
Oblonsky, of course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say:
'Well, Oblonsky stays with them.'..."

"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as
he spoke.  "I simply don't consider him more dishonest than any
other wealthy merchant or nobleman.  They've all made their money
alike--by their work and their intelligence."

"Oh, by what work?  Do you call it work to get hold of
concessions and speculate with them?"

"Of course it's work.  Work in this sense, that if it were not
for him and others like him, there would have been no railways."

"But that's not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned
profession."

"Granted, but it's work in the sense that his activity produces a
result--the railways.  But of course you think the railways
useless."

"No, that's another question; I am prepared to admit that
they're useful.  But all profit that is out of proportion to the
labor expended is dishonest."

"But who is to define what is proportionate?"

"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin,
conscious that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty
and dishonesty.  "Such as banking, for instance," he went on.
"It's an evil--the amassing of huge fortunes without labor, just
the same thing as with the spirit monopolies, it's only the form
that's changed.  _Le roi est mort, vive le roi_.  No sooner were
the spirit monopolies abolished than the railways came up, and
banking companies; that, too, is profit without work."

"Yes, that may all be very true and clever....  Lie down, Krak!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and
turning over all the hay.  He was obviously convinced of the
correctness of his position, and so talked serenely and without
haste.  "But you have not drawn the line between honest and
dishonest work.  That I receive a bigger salary than my chief
clerk, though he knows more about the work than I do--that's
dishonest, I suppose?"

"I can't say."

"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand,
let's say, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant
here, however hard he works, can never get more than fifty
roubles, is just as dishonest as my earning more than my chief
clerk, and Malthus getting more than a station-master.  No, quite
the contrary; I see that society takes up a sort of antagonistic
attitude to these people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancy
there's envy at the bottom of it...."

"No, that's unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in?
There is something not nice about that sort of business."

"You say," Levin went on, "that it's unjust for me to receive
five thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that's true.  It is
unfair, and I feel it, but..."

"It really is.  Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking,
shooting, doing nothing, while they are forever at work?" said
Vassenka Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in his life
reflecting on the question, and consequently considering it with
perfect sincerity.

"Yes, you feel it, but you don't give him your property," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking
Levin.

There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism
between the two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had
married sisters, a kind of rivalry had sprung up between them as
to which was ordering his life best, and now this hostility
showed itself in the conversation, as it began to take a personal
note.

"I don't give it away, because no one demands that from me, and
if I wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and
have no one to give it to."

"Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."

"Yes, but how am I to give it up?  Am I to go to him and make a
deed of conveyance?"

"I don't know; but if you are convinced that you have no
right..."

"I'm not at all convinced.  On the contrary, I feel I have no
right to give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to
my family."

"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust,
why is it you don't act accordingly?..."

"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between him and me."

"No, excuse me, that's a paradox."

"Yes, there's something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky
agreed.  "Ah! our host; so you're not asleep yet?" he said to the
peasant who came into the barn, opening the creaking door.  "How
is it you're not asleep?"

"No, how's one to sleep!  I thought our gentlemen would be
asleep, but I heard them chattering.  I want to get a hook from
here.  She won't bite?" he added, stepping cautiously with his
bare feet.

"And where are you going to sleep?"

"We are going out for the night with the beasts."

"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of
the hut and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the
faint light of the evening glow in the great frame of the open
doors.  "But listen, there are women's voices singing, and, on my
word, not badly too.  Who's that singing, my friend?"

"That's the maids from hard by here."

"Let's go, let's have a walk!  We shan't go to sleep, you know.
Oblonsky, come along!"

"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,
stretching.  "It's capital lying here."

"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up
eagerly, and putting on his shoes and stockings.  "Good-bye,
gentlemen.  If it's fun, I'll fetch you.  You've treated me to
some good sport, and I won't forget you."

"He really is a capital fellow, isn't he?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had
closed the door after him.

"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of
their conversation just before.  It seemed to him that he had
clearly expressed his thoughts and feelings to the best of his
capacity, and yet both of them, straightforward men and not
fools, had said with one voice that he was comforting himself
with sophistries.  This disconcerted him.

"It's just this, my dear boy.  One must do one of two things:
either admit that the existing order of society is just, and then
stick up for one's rights in it; or acknowledge that you are
enjoying unjust privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be
satisfied."

"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and
be satisfied--at least I could not.  The great thing for me is
to feel that I'm not to blame."

"What do you say, why not go after all?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, evidently weary of the strain of thought.  "We
shan't go to sleep, you know.  Come, let's go!"

Levin did not answer.  What they had said in the conversation,
that he acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his
thoughts.  "Can it be that it's only possible to be just
negatively?" he was asking himself.

"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, getting up.  "There's not a chance of sleeping.
Vassenka has been getting up some fun there.  Do you hear the
laughing and his voice?  Hadn't we better go?  Come along!"

"No, I'm not coming," answered Levin.

"Surely that's not a matter of principle too," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.

"It's not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"

"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.

"How so?"

"Do you suppose I don't see the line you've taken up with your
wife?  I heard how it's a question of the greatest consequence,
whether or not you're to be away for a couple of days' shooting.
That's all very well as an idyllic episode, but for your whole
life that won't answer.  A man must be independent; he has his
masculine interests.  A man has to be manly," said Oblonsky,
opening the door.

"In what way?  To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.

"Why not, if it amuses him?  _√áa ne tire pas a consequence_.  It
won't do my wife any harm, and it'll amuse me.  The great thing
is to respect the sanctity of the home.  There should be nothing
in the home.  But don't tie your own hands."

"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side.
"Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I won't wake anyone,
and shall set off at daybreak."

"_Messieurs, venez vite!_" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back.  "_Charmante!_  I've made such a discovery.  _Charmante!_ a
perfect Gretchen, and I've already made friends with her.
Really, exceedingly pretty," he declared in a tone of approval,
as though she had been made pretty entirely on his account, and
he was expressing his satisfaction with the entertainment that
had been provided for him.

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his
slippers, and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon
their voices were lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep.  He heard the
horses munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy
getting ready for the night, and going off for the night watch
with the beasts, then he heard the soldier arranging his bed on
the other side of the barn, with his nephew, the younger son of
their peasant host.  He heard the boy in his shrill little voice
telling his uncle what he thought about the dogs, who seemed to
him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what the dogs were
going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepy voice,
telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,
and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy's
questions, he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you'll
catch it," and soon after he began snoring himself, and
everything was still.  He could only hear the snort of the
horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.

"Is it really only negative?" he repeated to himself.  "Well,
what of it?  It's not my fault." And he began thinking about the
next day.

"Tomorrow I'll go out early, and I'll make a point of keeping
cool.  There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too.  When
I come back there'll be the note from Kitty.  Yes, Stiva may be
right, I'm not manly with her, I'm tied to her apron-strings....
Well, it can't be helped!  Negative again...."

Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky
and Stepan Arkadyevitch.  For an instant he opened his eyes: the
moon was up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the
moonlight, they were standing talking.  Stepan Arkadyevitch was
saying something of the freshness of one girl, comparing her to a
freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was
repeating some words, probably said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you
do your best to get round her!" Levin, half asleep, said:

"Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.


Chapter 12


Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust
out, was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response.
Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to get up so early.  Even Laska,
who was asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and
lazily stretched out and straightened her hind legs one after the
other.  Getting on his boots and stockings, taking his gun, and
carefully opening the creaking door of the barn, Levin went out
into the road.  The coachmen were sleeping in their carriages,
the horses were dozing.  Only one was lazily eating oats, dipping
its nose into the manger.  It was still gray out-of-doors.

"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess,
said, coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as
an old friend.

"Going shooting, granny.  Do I go this way to the marsh?"

"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and
hemp patches; there's a little footpath."  Stepping carefully
with her sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and
moved back the fence for him by the threshing floor.

"Straight on and you'll come to the marsh.  Our lads drove the
cattle there yesterday evening."

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path.  Levin followed
her with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky.  He
hoped the sun would not be up before he reached the marsh.  But
the sun did not delay.  The moon, which had been bright when he
went out, by now shone only like a crescent of quicksilver.  The
pink flush of dawn, which one could not help seeing before, now
had to be sought to be discerned at all.  What were before
undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could now be
distinctly seen.  They were sheaves of rye.  The dew, not visible
till the sun was up, wetted Levin's legs and his blouse above his
belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the
pollen had already fallen out.  In the transparent stillness of
morning the smallest sounds were audible.  A bee flew by Levin's
ear with the whizzing sound of a bullet.  He looked carefully,
and saw a second and a third.  They were all flying from the
beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over the hemp
patch in the direction of the marsh.  The path led straight to
the marsh.  The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose
from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the
reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist.  At the
edge of the marsh and the road, peasant boys and men, who had
been herding for the night, were lying, and in the dawn all were
asleep under their coats.  Not far from them were three hobbled
horses.  One of them clanked a chain.  Laska walked beside her
master, pressing a little forward and looking round.  Passing the
sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin examined
his pistols and let his dog off.  One of the horses, a sleek,
dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched
its tail and snorted.  The other horses too were frightened, and
splashing through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing
their hoofs out of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they
bounded out of the marsh.  Laska stopped, looking ironically at
the horses and inquiringly at Levin.  Levin patted Laska, and
whistled as a sign that she might begin.

Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed
under her.

Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh
plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska
detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent
of that strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than
any other.  Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this
scent was very strong, but it was impossible to determine in
which direction it grew stronger or fainter.  To find the
direction, she had to go farther away from the wind.  Not feeling
the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiff gallop, so
that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, away from
the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned
facing the wind.  Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she
felt at once that not their tracks only but they themselves were
here before her, and not one, but many.  Laska slackened her
speed.  They were here, but where precisely she could not yet
determine.  To find the very spot, she began to make a circle,
when suddenly her master's voice drew her off.  "Laska! here?" he
asked, pointing her to a different direction.  She stopped,
asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun.
But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot
covered with water, where there could not be anything.  She
obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, went
round it, and went back to her former position, and was at once
aware of the scent again.  Now when he was not hindering her, she
knew what to do, and without looking at what was under her feet,
and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into the water,
but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she began
making the circle which was to make all clear to her.  The scent
of them reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more
defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to her that
one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in
front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and
rigid.  On her short legs she could see nothing in front of her,
but by the scent she knew it was sitting not more than five paces
off.  She stood still, feeling more and more conscious of it, and
enjoying it in anticipation.  Her tail was stretched straight and
tense, and only wagging at the extreme end.  Her mouth was
slightly open, her ears raised.  One ear had been turned wrong
side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and
still more warily looked round, but more with her eyes than her
head, to her master.  He was coming along with the face she knew
so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her.  He
stumbled over the stump as he came, and moved, as she thought,
extraordinarily slowly.  She thought he came slowly, but he was
running.

Noticing Laska's special attitude as she crouched on the ground,
as it were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with
her mouth slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse,
and with an inward prayer for luck, especially with the first
bird, he ran up to her.  Coming quite close up to her, he could
from his height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what
she was seeing with her nose.  In a space between two little
thickets, at a couple of yards' distance, he could see a
grouse.  Turning its head, it was listening.  Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner
with a clumsy wag of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from
behind.

"But I can't go," thought Laska.  "Where am I to go?  From here I
feel them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where
they are or who they are."  But then he shoved her with his knee,
and in an excited whisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."

"Well, if that's what he wishes, I'll do it, but I can't answer
for myself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her
legs would carry her between the thick bushes.  She scented
nothing now; she could only see and hear, without understanding
anything.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry
and the peculiar round sound of its wings.  And immediately after
the shot it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet
mire.  Another bird did not linger, but rose behind Levin without
the dog.  When Levin turned towards it, it was already some way
off.  But his shot caught it.  Flying twenty paces further, the
second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball,
dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the
warm and fat grouse into his game bag.  "Eh, Laska, will it be
good?"

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully
risen, though unseen behind the storm-clouds.  The moon had lost
all of its luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky.  Not a
single star could be seen.  The sedge, silvery with dew before,
now shone like gold.  The stagnant pools were all like amber.
The blue of the grass had changed to yellow-green.  The marsh
birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes
that glittered with dew and cast long shadows.  A hawk woke up
and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and
looking discontentedly at the marsh.  Crows were flying about the
field, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old
man, who had got up from under his long coat and was combing his
hair.  The smoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of
the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and
he walked a little way off behind him.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed
his approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight
off.


Chapter 13


The sportsman's saying, that if the first beast or the first bird
is not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o'clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of
twenty miles, returned to his night's lodging with nineteen head
of fine game and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would
not go into the game bag.  His companions had long been awake,
and had had time to get hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so
much less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with
heads crooked aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's envy pleased
Levin.  He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by
Kitty with a note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy.  If you were uneasy about me, you
can feel easier than ever.  I've a new bodyguard, Marya
Vlasyevna,"--this was the midwife, a new and important personage
in Levin's domestic life.  "She has come to have a look at me.
She found me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are
back.  All are happy and well, and please, don't be in a hurry to
come back, but, if the sport is good, stay another day."

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his
wife, were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents
passed lightly over Levin.  One was that the chestnut trace
horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on the previous day,
was off his feed and out of sorts.  The coachman said he was
"Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.  Yes, indeed!
driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute
destroyed his good humor, though later he laughed at it a great
deal, was to find that of all the provisions Kitty had provided
in such abundance that one would have thought there was enough
for a week, nothing was left.  On his way back, tired and hungry
from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that
as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as
Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to give
him some.  It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"Well, this fellow's appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky.  "I never suffer
from loss of appetite, but he's really marvelous!..."

"Well, it can't be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at
Veslovsky.  "Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

"The beef's been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,"
answered Philip.

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might
have left me something!" and he felt ready to cry.

"Then put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip,
trying not to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some
nettles.  And you might at least ask for some milk for me."

But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at
having shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh
at his hungry mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had
several successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures
with the peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to
him, "Excuse our homely ways," and his night's adventures with
kiss-in-the-ring and the servant-girl and the peasant, who had
asked him was he married, and on learning that he was not, said
to him, "Well, mind you don't run after other men's wives--you'd
better get one of your own."  These words had particularly amused
Veslovsky.

"Altogether, I've enjoyed our outing awfully.  And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely.  It was
particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility
he had been feeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to
feel instead the most friendly disposition to him.



Chapter 14


Next day at ten o'clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds,
knocked at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

"_Entrez!_" Veslovsky called to him.  "Excuse me, I've only just
finished my ablutions," he said, smiling, standing before him in
his underclothes only.

"Don't mind me, please."  Levin sat down in the window.  "Have
you slept well?"

"Like the dead.  What sort of day is it for shooting?"

"What will you take, tea or coffee?"

"Neither.  I'll wait till lunch.  I'm really ashamed.  I suppose
the ladies are down?  A walk now would be capital.  You show me
your horses."

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even
doing some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars,
Levin returned to the house with his guest, and went with him
into the drawing room.

"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!"
said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the
samovar.  "What a pity ladies are cut off from these delights!"

"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,"
Levin said to himself.  Again he fancied something in the smile,
in the all-conquering air with which their guest addressed
Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and
began to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty's
confinement, and getting ready rooms for them.   Just as Levin
had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding, as
derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more
offensive the preparations for the approaching birth, the date of
which they reckoned, it seemed, on their fingers.  He tried to
turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best patterns of long
clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and avoid seeing
the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles of
linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance.
The birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was
promised him, but which he still could not believe in--so
marvelous it seemed--presented itself to his mind, on one hand,
as a happiness so immense, and therefore so incredible; on the
other, as an event so mysterious, that this assumption of a
definite knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation
for it, as for something ordinary that did happen to people,
jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down
his reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and
indifference, and so she gave him no peace.  She had commissioned
Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a flat, and now she called Levin
up.

"I know nothing about it, princess.  Do as you think fit," he
said.

"You must decide when you will move."

"I really don't know.  I know millions of children are born away
from Moscow, and doctors...why..."

"But if so..."

"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."

"We can't talk to Kitty about it!  Do you want me to frighten
her?  Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an
ignorant doctor."

"I will do just what you say," he said gloomily.

The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her.
Though the conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon
him, he was gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from
what he saw at the samovar.

"No, it's impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at
Vassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something with his
charming smile, and at her, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka's attitude, in his eyes,
in his smile.  Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty's
attitude and look.  And again the light died away in his eyes.
Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the slightest
transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of happiness,
peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair, rage, and
humiliation.  Again everything and everyone had become hateful to
him.

"You do just as you think best, princess," he said again, looking
round.

"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said
playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess's
conversation, but at the cause of Levin's agitation, which he had
noticed.

"How late you are today, Dolly!"

Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna.  Vassenka only rose
for an instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies
characteristic of the modern young man, he scarcely bowed, and
resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.

"I've been worried about Masha.  She did not sleep well, and is
dreadfully tiresome today," said Dolly.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on
the same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and
whether love is to be put higher than worldly considerations.
Kitty disliked the conversation, and she was disturbed both by
the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, and also by
the knowledge of the effect it would have on her husband.  But
she was too simple and innocent to know how to cut short this
conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man's very obvious admiration.  She
wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.  Whatever she
did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the worst
interpretation put on it.  And, in fact, when she asked Dolly
what was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this
uninteresting conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently
at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an unnatural and
disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said
Dolly.

"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and she
blushed.  She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he
would come, and she did not ask him.  "Where are you going,
Kostya?" she asked her husband with a guilty face, as he passed
by her with a resolute step.  This guilty air confirmed all his
suspicions.

"The mechanician came when I was away; I haven't seen him yet,"
he said, not looking at her.

He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he
heard his wife's familiar footsteps running with reckless speed
to him.

"What do you want?" he said to her shortly.  "We are busy."

"I beg your pardon," she said to the German mechanician; "I want
a few words with my husband."

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:

"Don't disturb yourself."

"The train is at three?" queried the German.  "I mustn't be
late."

Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.

"Well, what have you to say to me?" he said to her in French.

He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she
in her condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous,
crushed look.

"I...I want to say that we can't go on like this; that this
is misery..." she said.

"The servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don't
make a scene."

"Well, let's go in here!"

They were standing in the passage.  Kitty would have gone into
the next room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a
lesson.

"Well, come into the garden."

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path.  And no
longer considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained
and his agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from
some disaster, they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they
must speak out and clear up misunderstandings, must be alone
together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.

"We can't go on like this! It's misery! I am wretched; you are
wretched.  What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a
solitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly,
not nice, humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her
again in the same position with his clenched fists on his chest,
as he had stood before her that night.

"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see
I'm not to blame?  All the morning I've been trying to take a
tone...but such people ...Why did he come?  How happy we were!"
she said, breathless with the sobs that shook her.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to
run away from, and they could not possibly have found anything
very delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with
astonishment that they passed him on their way home with
comforted and radiant faces.



Chapter 15


After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly's part of
the house.  Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great
distress too that day.  She was walking about the room, talking
angrily to a little girl, who stood in the corner roaring.

"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner
all alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won't make you a
new frock," she said, not knowing how to punish her.

"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin.  "Where
does she get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for
he had wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had
come at an unlucky moment.

"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there...I can't
tell you really what she did.  It's a thousand pities Miss
Elliot's not with us.  This one sees to nothing--she's a
machine....  _Figurez-vous que la petite_?..."

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha's crime.

"That proves nothing; it's not a question of evil propensities at
all, it's simply mischief," Levin assured her.

"But you are upset about something?  What have you come for?"
asked Dolly.  "What's going on there?"

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy
for him to say what he had meant to say.

"I've not been in there, I've been alone in the garden with
Kitty.  We've had a quarrel for the second time since...Stiva
came."

Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been...not in Kitty, but
in that gentleman's behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant--
not unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"

"You mean, how shall I say....  Stay, stay in the corner!" she
said to Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother's face,
had been turning round.  "The opinion of the world would be that
he is behaving as young men do behave.  _Il fait la cour √† une
jeune et jolie femme_, and a husband who's a man of the world
should only be flattered by it."

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it.  Just after breakfast he said
to me in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin
de cour √† Kitty_."

"Well, that's all right then; now I'm satisfied.  I'll send him
away," said Levin.

"What do you mean!  Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror;
"nonsense, Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing.  "You can go
now to Fanny," she said to Masha.  "No, if you wish it, I'll
speak to Stiva.  He'll take him away.  He can say you're
expecting visitors.  Altogether he doesn't fit into the house."

"No, no, I'll do it myself."

"But you'll quarrel with him?"

"Not a bit.  I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing
with real enjoyment.  "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won't do it
again," he said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny,
but was standing irresolutely before her mother, waiting and
looking up from under her brows to catch her mother's eye.

The mother glanced at her.  The child broke into sobs, hid her
face on her mother's lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on
her head.

"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin,
and he went off to look for Veslovsky.

As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage
to be got ready to drive to the station.

"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.

"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste.  Where's the
visitor?"

"The gentleman's gone to his room."

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having
unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs,
was putting on his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin's face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as
much as a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin's
entrance.

"You ride in gaiters?"

"Yes, it's much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a
chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted
good humor.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry
for him and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy
look on Vassenka's face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together
that morning, trying their strength.  Levin took the fragment in
his hands and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick,
not knowing how to begin.

"I wanted...."  He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and
everything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in
the face: "I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you."

"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise.  "To drive where?"

"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.

"Are you going away, or has something happened?"

"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong
fingers more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split
stick.  "And I'm not expecting visitors, and nothing has
happened, but I beg you to go away.  You can explain my rudeness
as you like."

Vassenka drew himself up.

"I beg you to explain..." he said with dignity, understanding at
last.

"I can't explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to
control the trembling of his jaw; "and you'd better not ask."

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the
thick ends in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully
caught the end as it fell.

Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he
had proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes,
the soft voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better
than any words.  He bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling
contemptuously.

"Can I not see Oblonsky?"

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

"What else was there for him to do?" he thought.

"I'll send him to you at once."

"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after
hearing from his friend that he was being turned out of the
house, he found Levin in the garden, where he was walking about
waiting for his guest's departure.  "_Mais c'est ridicule!_  What
fly has stung you?  _Mais c'est du dernier ridicule!_  What did you
think, if a young man..."

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still
sore, for he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would
have enlarged on the reason, and he himself cut him short.

"Please don't go into it!  I can't help it.  I feel ashamed of
how I'm treating you and him.  But it won't be, I imagine, a
great grief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful to me
and to my wife."

"But it's insulting to him!  _Et puis c'est ridicule_."

"And to me it's both insulting and distressing!  And I'm not at
fault in any way, and there's no need for me to suffer."

"Well, this I didn't expect of you!  _On peut √™tre jaloux, mais
√† ce point, c'est du dernier ridicule!_"

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of
the avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone.  Soon he
heard the rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how
Vassenka, sitting in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the
trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue, jolting up
and down over the ruts.

"What's this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house
and stopped the trap.  It was the mechanician, whom Levin had
totally forgotten.  The mechanician, bowing low, said something
to Veslovsky, then clambered into the trap, and they drove off
together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin's
action.  And he himself felt not only in the highest degree
_ridicule_, but also utterly guilty and disgraced.  But remembering
what sufferings he and his wife had been through, when he asked
himself how he should act another time, he answered that he
should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone
except the princess, who could not pardon Levin's action, became
extraordinarily lively and good humored, like children after a
punishment or grown-up people after a dreary, ceremonious
reception, so that by the evening Vassenka's dismissal was spoken
of, in the absence of the princess, as though it were some remote
event.  And Dolly, who had inherited her father's gift of
humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she
related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh humorous
additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the
benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heard
suddenly the rumble of the trap.  And who should be in the trap
but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his
gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.

"If only you'd ordered out the carriage!  But no! and then I
hear: 'Stop!'  Oh, I thought they've relented.  I look out, and
behold a fat German being sat down by him and driving away....
And my new shoes all for nothing!..."



Chapter 16


Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see
Anna.  She was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin
disliked.  She quite understood how right the Levins were in not
wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky.  But she felt she
must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelings could not be
changed, in spite of the change in her position.  That she might
be independent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya
Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for the drive;
but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going?  But, even if
I did dislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my
horses," he said.  "You never told me that you were going for
certain.  Hiring horses in the village is disagreeable to me,
and, what's of more importance, they'll undertake the job and
never get you there.  I have horses.  And if you don't want to
wound me, you'll take mine."

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had
ready for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays,
getting them together from the farm- and saddle-horses--not at
all a smart-looking set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna
the whole distance in a single day.  At that moment, when horses
were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife,
it was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number, but
the duties of hospitality would not let him allow Darya
Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.  Moreover,
he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked for
the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna's
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state,
were taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin's advice, started before daybreak.
The road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted
along merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the
counting-house clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom
for greater security.  Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only
on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant's with whom
Levin had stayed on the way to Sviazhsky's, and chatting with the
women about their children, and with the old man about Count
Vronsky, whom the latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna,
at ten o'clock, went on again.  At home, looking after her
children, she had no time to think.  So now, after this journey
of four hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed
swarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life as she
never had before, and from the most different points of view.
Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself.  At first she
thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although
the princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised
to look after them.  "If only Masha does not begin her naughty
tricks, if Grisha isn't kicked by a horse, and Lily's stomach
isn't upset again!" she thought.  But these questions of the
present were succeeded by questions of the immediate future.  She
began thinking how she had to get a new flat in Moscow for the
coming winter, to renew the drawing room furniture, and to make
her elder girl a cloak.  Then questions of the more remote future
occurred to her: how she was to place her children in the world.
"The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"

"It's very well that I'm teaching Grisha, but of course that's
only because I am free myself now, I'm not with child.  Stiva,
of course, there's no counting on.  And with the help of
good-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there's another
baby coming?..."  And the thought struck her how untruly it was
said that the curse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should
bring forth children.

"The birth itself, that's nothing; but the months of carrying the
child--that's what's so intolerable," she thought, picturing to
herself her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby.  And
she recalled the conversation she had just had with the young
woman at the inn.  On being asked whether she had any children,
the handsome young woman had answered cheerfully:

"I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent."

"Well, did you grieve very much for her?" asked Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Why grieve?  The old man has grandchildren enough as it is.  It
was only a trouble.  No working, nor nothing.  Only a tie."

This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite
of the good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now
she could not help recalling these words.  In those cynical words
there was indeed a grain of truth.

"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over
her whole existence during those fifteen years of her married
life, "pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to
everything, and most of all--hideousness.  Kitty, young and
pretty as she is, even Kitty has lost her looks; and I when I'm
with child become hideous, I know it.  The birth, the agony, the
hideous agonies, that last moment...then the nursing, the
sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."

Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain
from sore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child.
"Then the children's illnesses, that everlasting apprehension;
then bringing them up; evil propensities" (she thought of little
Masha's crime among the raspberries), "education, Latin--it's all
so incomprehensible and difficult.  And on the top of it all, the
death of these children."  And there rose again before her
imagination the cruel memory, that always tore her mother's
heart, of the death of her last little baby, who had died of
croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at the little
pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at
the sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples,
and the open, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the
moment when it was being covered with the little pink lid with a
cross braided on it.

"And all this, what's it for?  What is to come of it all?  That
I'm  wasting my life, never having a moment's peace, either with
child, or nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched
myself and worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the
children are growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless.
Even now, if it weren't for spending the summer at the Levins',
I don't know how we should be managing to live.  Of course Kostya
and Kitty have so much tact that we don't feel it; but it can't
go on.  They'll have children, they won't be able to keep us;
it's a drag on them as it is.  How is papa, who has hardly
anything left for himself, to help us?  So that I can't even
bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the
help of other people, at the cost of humiliation.  Why, even if
we suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don't die,
and I bring them up somehow.  At the very best they'll simply be
decent people.  That's all I can hope for.  And to gain simply
that--what agonies, what toil!...  One's whole life ruined!"
Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said, and
again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help
admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.

"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the
counting house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were
frightening her.

"From this village, they say, it's five miles."  The carriage
drove along the village street and onto a bridge.  On the bridge
was a crowd of peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves
on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chattering.  They stood
still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the carriage.  All
the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and
happy, making her envious of their enjoyment of life.  "They're
all living, they're all enjoying life," Darya Alexandrovna still
mused when she had passed the peasant women and was driving
uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of
the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from prison, from
the world of worries that fret me to death, am only looking about
me now for an instant.  They all live; those peasant women and my
sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see--all,
but not I.

"And they attack Anna.  What for? am I any better?  I have,
anyway, a husband I love--not as I should like to love him, still
I do love him, while Anna never loved hers.  How is she to blame?
She wants to live.  God has put that in our hearts.  Very likely
I should have done the same.  Even to this day I don't feel sure
I did right in listening to her at that terrible time when she
came to me in Moscow.  I ought then to have cast off my husband
and have begun my life fresh.  I might have loved and have been
loved in reality.  And is it any better as it is?  I don't
respect him.  He's necessary to me," she thought about her
husband, "and I put up with him.  Is that any better?  At that
time I could still have been admired, I had beauty left me
still," Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would
have liked to look at herself in the looking glass.  She had a
traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take
it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swaying
counting house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if
either of them were to look round, and she did not take out the
glass.

But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it
was not too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was
always particularly attentive to her, of Stiva's good-hearted
friend, Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through
the scarlatina, and was in love with her.  And there was someone
else, a quite young man, who--her husband had told her it as a
joke--thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters.  And
the most passionate and impossible romances rose before Darya
Alexandrovna's imagination.  "Anna did quite right, and certainly
I shall never reproach her for it.  She is happy, she makes
another person happy, and she's not broken down as I am, but most
likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to every
impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,--and a sly smile curved
her lips, for, as she pondered on Anna's love affair, Darya
Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical
love affair for herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the
ideal man who was in love with her.  She, like Anna, confessed
the whole affair to her husband.  And the amazement and
perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her smile.

In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that
led to Vozdvizhenskoe.



Chapter 17


The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the
right, to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a
cart.  The counting house clerk was just going to jump down, but
on second thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the peasants
instead, and beckoned to them to come up.  The wind, that seemed
to blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still;
gadflies settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them
off.  The metallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that
came to them from the cart, ceased.  One of the peasants got up
and came towards the carriage.

"Well, you are slow!" the counting house clerk shouted angrily to
the peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the
ruts of the rough dry road.  "Come along, do!"

A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair,
and his bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the
carriage, quickening his steps, and took hold of the mud-guard
with his sunburnt hand.

"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count's?" he repeated; "go
on to the end of this track.  Then turn to the left.  Straight
along the avenue and you'll come right upon it.  But whom do you
want?  The count himself?"

"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said
vaguely, not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

"At home for sure," said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot
to the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a
heel in the dust.  "Sure to be at home," he repeated, evidently
eager to talk.  "Only yesterday visitors arrived.  There's a
sight of visitors come.  What do you want?"  He turned round and
called to a lad, who was shouting something to him from the cart.
"Oh!  They all rode by here not long since, to look at a reaping
machine.  They'll be home by now.  And who will you be belonging
to?..."

"We've come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the
box.  "So it's not far?"

"I tell you, it's just here.  As soon as you get out..." he said,
keeping hold all the while of the carriage.

A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.

"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" he asked.

"I don't know, my boy."

"So you keep to the left, and you'll come right on it," said the
peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to
converse.

The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning
off when the peasant shouted: "Stop!  Hi, friend!  Stop!" called
the two voices.  The coachman stopped.

"They're coming!  They're yonder!" shouted the peasant.  "See
what a turn-out!" he said, pointing to four persons on horseback,
and two in a _char-√†-banc_, coming along the road.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback,
and Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-√†-banc_.  They had
gone out to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at
a walking pace.  Anna was in front beside Veslovsky.  Anna,
quietly walking her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane
and short tail, her beautiful head with her black hair straying
loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist
in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her
deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be
on horseback.  The conception of riding on horseback for a lady
was, in Darya Alexandrovna's mind, associated with ideas of
youthful flirtation and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was
unbecoming in Anna's position.  But when she had scrutinized her,
seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding.  In
spite of her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and
dignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of Anna,
that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka
Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout
legs stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own
appearance.  Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored
smile as she recognized him.  Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay
mare, obviously heated from galloping.  He was holding her in,
pulling at the reins.

After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey.  Sviazhsky
and Princess Varvara in a new _char-√†-banc_ with a big, raven-black
trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.

Anna's face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant
when, in the little figure huddled in a corner of the old
carriage, she recognized Dolly.  She uttered a cry, started in
the saddle, and set her horse into a gallop.  On reaching the
carriage she jumped off without assistance, and holding up her
riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.

"I thought it was you and dared not think it.  How delightful!
You can't fancy how glad I am!" she said, at one moment pressing
her face against Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding
her off and examining her with a smile.

"Here's a delightful surprise, Alexey!" she said, looking round
at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.

Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.

"You wouldn't believe how glad we are to see you," he said,
giving peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong
white teeth in a smile.

Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his
cap and greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over
his head.

"That's Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of
inquiry from Dolly as the _char-√†-banc_ drove up.

"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face
betrayed her dissatisfaction.

Princess Varvara was her husband's aunt, and she had long known
her, and did not respect her.  She knew that Princess Varvara had
passed her whole life toadying on her rich relations, but that
she should now be sponging on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to
her, mortified Dolly on account of her kinship with her husband.
Anna noticed Dolly's expression, and was disconcerted by it.  She
blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.

Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-√†-banc_ and coldly greeted
Princess Varvara.  Sviazhsky too she knew.  He inquired how his
queer friend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over
the ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched
mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they should get into the
_char-√†-banc_.

"And I'll get into this vehicle," he said.  "The horse is quiet,
and the princess drives capitally."

"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we'll go in
the carriage," and taking Dolly's arm, she drew her away.

Darya Alexandrovna's eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant
carriage of a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid
horses, and the elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her.  But
what struck her most of all was the change that had taken place
in Anna, whom she knew so well and loved.  Any other woman, a
less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having
thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road,
would not have noticed anything special in Anna.  But now Dolly
was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in
women during the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna's
face.  Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in her
cheeks and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it
were, fluttered about her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the
grace and rapidity of her movements, the fulness of the notes of
her voice, even the manner in which, with a sort of angry
friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permission to
get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg
foremost--it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if
she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden
embarrassment came over both of them.  Anna was disconcerted by
the intent look of inquiry Dolly fixed upon her.  Dolly was
embarrassed because after Sviazhsky's phrase about "this
vehicle," she could not help feeling ashamed of the dirty old
carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.  The coachman Philip
and the counting house clerk were experiencing the same
sensation.  The counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion,
busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman
became sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in
future by this external superiority.  He smiled ironically,
looking at the raven horse, and was already deciding in his own
mind that this smart trotter in the _char-√†-banc_ was only good for
_promenade_, and wouldn't do thirty miles straight off in the heat.

The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively
and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making
their comments on it.

"They're pleased, too; haven't seen each other for a long while,"
said the curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.

"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to
cart the corn, that 'ud be quick work!"

"Look-ee!  Is that a woman in breeches?" said one of them,
pointing to Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.

"Nay, a man! See how smartly he's going it!"

"Eh, lads! seems we're not going to sleep, then?"

"What chance of sleep today!" said the old man, with a sidelong
look at the sun.  "Midday's past, look-ee!  Get your hooks, and
come along!"



Chapter 18


Anna looked at Dolly's thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles
filled with dust from the road, and she was on the point of
saying what she was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got
thinner.  But, conscious that she herself had grown handsomer,
and that Dolly's eyes were telling her so, she sighed and began
to speak about herself.

"You are looking at me," she said, "and wondering how I can be
happy in my position?  Well! it's shameful to confess, but I...
I'm inexcusably happy.  Something magical has happened to me,
like a dream, when you're frightened, panic-stricken, and all of
a sudden you wake up and all the horrors are no more.  I have
waked up.  I have lived through the misery, the dread, and now
for a long while past, especially since we've been here, I've
been so happy!..." she said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.

"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more
coldly than she wanted to.  "I'm very glad for you.  Why haven't
you written to me?"

"Why?...  Because I hadn't the courage....  You forget my
position..."

"To me?  Hadn't the courage?  If you knew how I...I look at..."

Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning,
but for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.

"But of that we'll talk later.  What's this, what are all these
buildings?" she asked, wanting to change the conversation and
pointing to the red and green roofs that came into view behind
the green hedges of acacia and lilac.  "Quite a little town."

But Anna did not answer.

"No, no!  How do you look at my position, what do you think of
it?" she asked.

"I consider..." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that
instant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with
the right leg foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up
and down in his short jacket on the chamois leather of the
side saddle.  "He's doing it, Anna Arkadyevna!" he shouted.

Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation
in the carriage, and so she cut short her thought.

"I don't think anything," she said, "but I always loved you, and
if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they
are and not as one would like them to be...."

Anna, taking her eyes off her friend's face and dropping her
eyelids (this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before),
pondered, trying to penetrate the full significance of the words.
And obviously interpreting them as she would have wished, she
glanced at Dolly.

"If you had any sins," she said, "they would all be forgiven you
for your coming to see me and these words."

And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes.  She pressed Anna's
hand in silence.

"Well, what are these buildings?  How many there are of them!"
After a moment's silence she repeated her question.

"These are the servants' houses, barns, and stables," answered
Anna.  "And there the park begins.  It had all gone to ruin, but
Alexey had everything renewed.  He is very fond of this place,
and, what I never expected, he has become intensely interested in
looking after it.  But his is such a rich nature!  Whatever he
takes up, he does splendidly.  So far from being bored by it, he
works with passionate interest.  He--with his temperament as I
know it--he has become careful and businesslike, a first-rate
manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of
the land.  But only in that.  When it's a question of tens of
thousands, he doesn't think of money."  She spoke with that
gleefully sly smile with which women often talk of the secret
characteristics only known to them--of those they love.  "Do you
see that big building? that's the new hospital.  I believe it
will cost over a hundred thousand; that's his hobby just now.
And do you know how it all came about?  The peasants asked him
for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he
refused, and I accused him of being miserly.  Of course it was
not really because of that, but everything together, he began
this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about
money.  _C'est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the
more for it.  And now you'll see the house in a moment.  It was
his grandfather's house, and he has had nothing changed outside."

"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration
at the handsome house with columns, standing out among the
different-colored greens of the old trees in the garden.

"Isn't it fine?  And from the house, from the top, the view is
wonderful."

They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with
flowers, in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of
stones round the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a
covered entry.

"Ah, they're here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle
horses, which were just being led away from the steps.  "It is a
nice horse, isn't it?  It's my cob; my favorite.  Lead him here
and bring me some sugar.  Where is the count?" she inquired of
two smart footmen who darted out.  "Ah, there he is!" she said,
seeing Vronsky coming to meet her with Veslovsky.

"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in
French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once
more greeted Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her
hand.  "I think the big balcony room."

"Oh, no, that's too far off!  Better in the corner room, we shall
see each other more.  Come, let's go up," said Anna, as she gave
her favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.

"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," she said to Veslovsky, who came
out too on the steps.

"_Pardon, j'en ai tout plein les poches_," he answered, smiling,
putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.

"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," she said, rubbing her handkerchief
on her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly.  "You can stay some time?  For one day
only?  That's impossible!"

"I promised to be back, and the children..." said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the
carriage, and because she knew her face must be covered with
dust.

"No, Dolly, darling!...  Well, we'll see.  Come along, come
along!" and Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested,
but the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it.
And this room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of
luxury than any in which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that
reminded her of the best hotels abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her
riding habit for a moment beside Dolly.  "Tell me about all of
you.  Stiva I had only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one
about the children.  How is my favorite, Tanya?  Quite a big
girl, I expect?"

"Yes, she's very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly,
surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her
children.  "We are having a delightful stay at the Levins'," she
added.

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!...
You might have all come to us.  Stiva's an old friend and a great
friend of Alexey's, you know," she added, and suddenly she
blushed.

"Yes, but we are all..." Dolly answered in confusion.

"But in my delight I'm talking nonsense.  The one thing, darling,
is that I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again.
"You haven't told me yet how and what you think about me, and I
keep wanting to know.  But I'm glad you will see me as I am.
The chief thing I shouldn't like would be for people to imagine I
want to prove anything.  I don't want to prove anything; I
merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself.  I have the
right to do that, haven't I?  But it is a big subject, and we'll
talk over everything properly later.  Now I'll go and dress and
send a maid to you."



Chapter 19


Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife's eye,
scanned her room.  All she had seen in entering the house and
walking through it, and all she saw now in her room, gave her an
impression of wealth and sumptuousness and of that modern
European luxury of which she had only read in English novels, but
had never seen in Russia and in the country.  Everything was new
from the new French hangings on the walls to the carpet which
covered the whole floor.  The bed had a spring mattress, and a
special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little
pillows.  The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little
sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the
window curtains, and the _porti√®res_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair
done up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly's, was as
new and expensive as the whole room.  Darya Alexandrovna liked
her neatness, her deferential and obliging manners, but she felt
ill at ease with her.  She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched
dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for
her.  She was ashamed of the very patches and darned places of
which she had been so proud at home.  At home it had been so
clear that for six dressing jackets there would be needed
twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and
making, and these thirty shillings had been saved.  But before
the maid she felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least
uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka,
whom she had known for years, walked in.  The smart maid was sent
for to go to her mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya
Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady's arrival, and
began to chatter away without a pause.  Dolly observed that she
was longing to express her opinion in regard to her mistress's
position, especially as to the love and devotion of the count to
Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefully interrupted her whenever she
began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady's dearer to me than
anything.  Well, it's not for us to judge.  And, to be sure,
there seems so much love..."

"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya
Alexandrovna cut her short.

"Certainly.  We've two women kept specially for washing small
things, but most of the linen's done by machinery.  The count
goes into everything himself.  Ah, what a husband!..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop
to Annushka's gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown.  Dolly scrutinized
that simple gown attentively.  She knew what it meant, and the
price at which such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now.  She was perfectly composed and at
ease.  Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the
impression her arrival had made on her, and had assumed that
superficial, careless tone which, as it were, closed the door on
that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were
kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?"  (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.)
"Very well.  She has got on wonderfully.  Would you like to see
her?  Come, I'll show her to you.  We had a terrible bother," she
began telling her, "over nurses.  We had an Italian wet-nurse.  A
good creature, but so stupid!  We wanted to get rid of her, but
the baby is so used to her that we've gone on keeping her still."

"But how have you managed?..."  Dolly was beginning a question
as to what name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden
frown on Anna's face, she changed the drift of her question.

"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"

But Anna had understood.

"You didn't mean to ask that?  You meant to ask about her
surname.  Yes?  That worries Alexey.  She has no name--that is,
she's a Karenina," said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing
could be seen but the eyelashes meeting.  "But we'll talk about
all that later," her face suddenly brightening.  "Come, I'll show
you her.  _Elle est tres gentille_.  She crawls now."

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole
house struck her still more.  There were little go-carts ordered
from England, and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa
after the fashion of a billiard table, purposely constructed for
crawling, and swings and baths, all of special pattern, and
modern.  They were all English, solid, and of good make, and
obviously very expensive.  The room was large, and very light and
lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock,
was sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her
dinner of broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest.
The baby was being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was
evidently sharing her meal.  Neither the wet-nurse nor the
head nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which
came the sound of their conversation in the queer French which
was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna's voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a
disagreeable face and a dissolute expression walked in at the
door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls, and immediately began to
defend herself though Anna had not found fault with her.  At
every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedly several
times, "Yes, my lady."

The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red
little body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya
Alexandrovna in spite of the cross expression with which she
stared at the stranger.  She positively envied the baby's healthy
appearance.  She was delighted, too, at the baby's crawling.  Not
one of her own children had crawled like that.  When the baby was
put on the carpet and its little dress tucked up behind, it was
wonderfully charming.  Looking round like some little wild animal
at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she
smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding
her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and
rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step
forward with her little arms.

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the
English nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all.  It was
only on the supposition that no good nurse would have entered so
irregular a household as Anna's that Darya Alexandrovna could
explain to herself how Anna with her insight into people could
take such an unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse
to her child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna
saw at once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no
common existence, and that the mother's visit was something
exceptional.  Anna wanted to get the baby her plaything, and
could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many
teeth the baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about
the two last teeth.

"I sometimes feel sorry I'm so superfluous here," said Anna,
going out of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape
the plaything standing in the doorway.  "It was very different
with my first child."

"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna
shyly.

"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna,
screwing up her eyes, as though looking at something far away.
"But we'll talk about that later.  You wouldn't believe it, I'm
like a hungry beggar woman when a full dinner is set before her,
and she does not know what to begin on first.  The dinner is you,
and the talks I have before me with you, which I could never have
