say is this: her position is intolerable, and it might be
alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by it.  I will
arrange it all for you, so that you'll not notice it.  You did
promise it, you know."

"The promise was given before.  And I had supposed that the
question of my son had settled the matter.  Besides, I had hoped
that Anna Arkadyevna had enough generosity..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch articulated with difficulty, his lips twitching
and his face white.

"She leaves it all to your generosity.  She begs, she implores
one thing of you--to extricate her from the impossible position
in which she is placed.  She does not ask for her son now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a good man.  Put yourself in her
position for a minute.  The question of divorce for her in her
position is a question of life and death.  If you had not
promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her
position, she would have gone on living in the country.  But you
promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow.  And here
she's been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting
cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an answer.  Why, it's
like keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope
round his neck, promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy.  Have
pity on her, and I will undertake to arrange everything.  _Vos
scrupules_..."

"I am not talking about that, about that..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust.  "But, perhaps, I
promised what I had no right to promise."

"So you go back from your promise?"

"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time
to consider how much of what I promised is possible."

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won't
believe that!  She's unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and
you cannot refuse in such..."

"As much of what I promised as is possible.  _Vous professez
d'être libre penseur._  But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of
such gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law."

"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I'm aware,
divorce is allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Divorce is
sanctioned even by our church.  And we see..."

"It is allowed, but not in the sense..."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said
Oblonsky, after a brief pause.  "Wasn't it you (and didn't we all
appreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply
by Christian feeling was ready to make any sacrifice?  You said
yourself: if a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also, and
now..."

"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly
onto his feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, "I beg you
to drop this...to drop...this subject!"

"Oh, no!  Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of
embarrassment; "but like a messenger I have simply performed the
commission given me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and
said:

"I must think it over and seek for guidance.  The day after
tomorrow I will give you a final answer," he said, after
considering a moment.



Chapter 19


Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to
announce:

"Sergey Alexyevitch!"

"Who's Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning,
but he remembered immediately.

"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud.  "Sergey Alexyevitch!  I thought it
was the director of a department.  Anna asked me to see him too,"
he thought.

And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had
said to him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him.  Find out
exactly where he is, who is looking after him.  And Stiva...if
it were possible!  Could it be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch
knew what was meant by that "if it were possible,"--if it were
possible to arrange the divorce so as to let her have her son....
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to dream of that,
but still he was glad to see his nephew.

Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never
spoke to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention
a single word about her.

"He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we
had not foreseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "Indeed, we
feared for his life.  But with rational treatment, and
sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength, and now, by
the doctor's advice, I have let him go to school.  And certainly
the companionship of school has had a good effect on him, and he
is perfectly well, and making good progress."

"What a fine fellow he's grown!  He's not Seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling, as he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in
blue coat and long trousers, who walked in alertly and
confidently.  The boy looked healthy and good-humored.  He bowed
to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed
and turned hurriedly away from him, as though offended and
irritated at something.  The boy went up to his father and handed
him a note of the marks he had gained in school.

"Well, that's very fair," said his father, "you can go."

"He's thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into
a boy; I like that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Do you remember
me?"

The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.

"Yes, _mon oncle_," he answered, glancing at his father, and
again he looked downcast.

His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.

"Well, and how are you getting on?" he said, wanting to talk to
him, and not knowing what to say.

The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand
away.  As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced
doubtfully at his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out
of the room.

A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his
mother.  Since then he had heard nothing more of her.  And in the
course of that year he had gone to school, and made friends among
his schoolfellows.  The dreams and memories of his mother, which
had made him ill after seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts
now.  When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away,
regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a
boy and a schoolboy.  He knew that his father and mother were
separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had to remain with his
father, and he tried to get used to that idea.

He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called
up those memories of which he was ashamed.  He disliked it all
the more as from some words he had caught as he waited at the
study door, and still more from the faces of his father and
uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking of his mother.
And to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom
he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to
sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, Seryozha tried
not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of
mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.

But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the
stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime
at school, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his
father's presence.

"We have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle's
question.  "It's like this, do you see: two sit on a bench--
they're the passengers; and one stands up straight on the bench.
And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts, and
they run through all the rooms--the doors are left open
beforehand.  Well, and it's pretty hard work being the
conductor!"

"That's the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired,
smiling.

"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when
they stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."

"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his
mother's; not childish now--no longer fully innocent.  And though
he had promised Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he
could not restrain himself.

"Do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.

"No, I don't," Seryozha said quickly.  He blushed crimson, and
his face clouded over.  And his uncle could get nothing more out
of him.  His tutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour
later, and for a long while he could not make out whether he was
ill-tempered or crying.

"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?"
said the tutor.  "I told you it was a dangerous game.  And we
shall have to speak to the director."

"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that's
certain."

"Well, what is it, then?"

"Leave me alone!  If I remember, or if I don't remember?...what
business is it of his?  Why should I remember?  Leave me in
peace!" he said, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.



Chapter 20


Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in
Petersburg.  In Petersburg, besides business, his sister's
divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as he always
did, to freshen himself up, as he said, after the mustiness of
Moscow.

In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was
yet a stagnant bog.  Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it.  After
living for some time in Moscow, especially in close relations
with his family, he was conscious of a depression of spirits.
After being a long time in Moscow without a change, he reached a
point when he positively began to be worrying himself over his
wife's ill-humor and reproaches, over his children's health and
education, and the petty details of his official work; even the
fact of being in debt worried him.  But he had only to go and
stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which
he moved, where people lived--really lived--instead of vegetating
as in Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at
once, like wax before the fire.  His wife?...  Only that day he
had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky.  Prince Tchetchensky had
a wife and family, grown-up pages in the corps,...and he had
another illegitimate family of children also.  Though the first
family was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his
second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him to
his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he thought
it good for his son, enlarging his ideas.  What would have been
said to that in Moscow?

His children?  In Petersburg children did not prevent their
parents from enjoying life.  The children were brought up in
schools, and there was no trace of the wild idea that prevailed
in Moscow, in Lvov's household, for instance, that all the
luxuries of life were for the children, while the parents have
nothing but work and anxiety.  Here people understood that a man
is in duty bound to live for himself, as every man of culture
should live.

His official duties?  Official work here was not the stiff,
hopeless drudgery that it was in Moscow.  Here there was some
interest in official life.  A chance meeting, a service rendered,
a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, and a man's career
might be made in a trice.  So it had been with Bryantsev, whom
Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of
the highest functionaries in government now.  There was some
interest in official work like that.

The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially
soothing effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.  Bartnyansky, who must
spend at least fifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in,
had made an interesting comment the day before on that subject.

As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Bartnyansky:

"You're friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a
favor: say a word to him, please, for me.  There's an appointment
I should like to get--secretary of the agency..."

"Oh, I shan't remember all that, if you tell it to me....  But
what possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?...  Take
it as you will, it's a low business."

Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a
"growing thing"--Bartnyansky would not have understood that.

"I want the money, I've nothing to live on."

"You're living, aren't you?"

"Yes, but in debt."

"Are you, though?  Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.

"Very heavily: twenty thousand."

Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.

"Oh, lucky fellow!" said he.  "My debts mount up to a million and
a half, and I've nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"

And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in
words only but in actual fact.  Zhivahov owed three hundred
thousand, and hadn't a farthing to bless himself with, and he
lived, and in style too!  Count Krivtsov was considered a
hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses.
Petrovsky had run through five millions, and still lived in just
the same style, and was even a manager in the financial
department with a salary of twenty thousand.  But besides this,
Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  It made him younger.  In Moscow he sometimes found
a gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched,
walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the
society of young women, and did not dance at balls.  In
Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.

His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described
to him on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of
sixty, who had just come back from abroad:

"We don't know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky.  "I
spent the summer in Baden, and you wouldn't believe it, I felt
quite a young man.  At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my
thoughts....  One dines and drinks a glass of wine, and feels
strong and ready for anything.  I came home to Russia--had to see
my wife, and, what's more, go to my country place; and there,
you'd hardly believe it, in a fortnight I'd got into a dressing
gown and given up dressing for dinner.  Needn't say I had no
thoughts left for pretty women.  I became quite an old gentleman.
There was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal
salvation.  I went off to Paris--I was as right as could be at
once."

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr
Oblonsky described.  In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he
had had to be there for long together, he might in good earnest
have come to considering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt
himself a man of the world again.

Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there
had long existed rather curious relations.  Stepan Arkadyevitch
always flirted with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in
jest, the most unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted
her so much.  The day after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan
Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this
jesting flirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he
did not know how to extricate himself, as unluckily he was so far
from being attracted by her that he thought her positively
disagreeable.  What made it hard to change the conversation was
the fact that he was very attractive to her.  So that he was
considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which
cut short their _tête-à-tête_.

"Ah, so you're here!" said she when she saw him.  "Well, and what
news of your poor sister?  You needn't look at me like that," she
added.  "Ever since they've all turned against her, all those
who're a thousand times worse than she, I've thought she did a
very fine thing.  I can't forgive Vronsky for not letting me know
when she was in Petersburg.  I'd have gone to see her and gone
about with her everywhere.  Please give her my love.  Come, tell
me about her."

"Yes, her position is very difficult; she..." began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as
sterling coin Princess Myakaya's words "tell me about her."
Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did,
and began talking herself.

"She's done what they all do, except me--only they hide it.  But
she wouldn't be deceitful, and she did a fine thing.  And she did
better still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours.
You must excuse me.  Everybody used to say he was so clever, so
very clever; I was the only one that said he was a fool.  Now
that he's so thick with Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say
he's crazy, and I should prefer not to agree with everybody, but
this time I can't help it."

"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it
mean?  Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister's behalf, and I
asked him to give me a final answer.  He gave me no answer, and
said he would think it over.  But this morning, instead of an
answer, I received an invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna
for this evening."

"Ah, so that's it, that's it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully,
"they're going to ask Landau what he's to say."

"Ask Landau?  What for?  Who or what's Landau?"

"What! you don't know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau,
le clairvoyant_?  He's crazy too, but on him your sister's fate
depends.  See what comes of living in the provinces--you know
nothing about anything.  Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in
a shop in Paris, and he went to a doctor's; and in the doctor's
waiting room he fell asleep, and in his sleep he began giving
advice to all the patients.  And wonderful advice it was!  Then
the wife of Yury Meledinsky--you know, the invalid?--heard of
this Landau, and had him to see her husband.  And he cured her
husband, though I can't say that I see he did him much good, for
he's just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed
in him, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia.
Here there's been a general rush to him, and he's begun doctoring
everyone.  He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy
to him that she adopted him."

"Adopted him?"

"Yes, as her son.  He's not Landau any more now, but Count
Bezzubov.  That's neither here nor there, though; but Lidia--I'm
very fond of her, but she has a screw loose somewhere--has lost
her heart to this Landau now, and nothing is settled now in her
house or Alexey Alexandrovitch's without him, and so your
sister's fate is now in the hands of Landau, _alias_ Count
Bezzubov."



Chapter 21


After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky's, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna's.

"Who else is with the countess?--a Frenchman?" Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar
overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather
artless-looking overcoat with clasps.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter
answered severely.

"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
he went upstairs.  "Curious!  It would be quite as well, though,
to get on friendly terms with her.  She has immense influence.
If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a
certainty."

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia
Ivanovna's little drawing room the blinds were drawn and the
lamps lighted.  At a round table under a lamp sat the countess
and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking softly.  A short, thinnish
man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips and knock-kneed
legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar
of his coat, was standing at the end of the room gazing at the
portraits on the wall.  After greeting the lady of the house and
Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.

"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky.  And she introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his
moist, lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch's outstretched hand
and immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits
again.  The countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each
other significantly.

"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside
Karenin.

"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a soft voice,
glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you're
probably aware.  Only he does not like the title."

"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he
completely cured Countess Bezzubova."

"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to
Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "This separation is awful for her.  It's
such a blow to her!"

"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, he's going to Paris.  He heard a voice yesterday," said
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as
circumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something
peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which he had not the
key.

A moment's silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
as though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a
fine smile to Oblonsky:

"I've known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a
closer acquaintance with you.  _Les amis de nos amis sont nos
amis._  But to be a true friend, one must enter into the spiritual
state of one's friend, and I fear that you are not doing so in
the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch.  You understand what I mean?"
she said, lifting her fine pensive eyes.

"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch..." said Oblonsky.  Having no clear idea what they
were talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

"The change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia
Ivanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of
Alexey Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau;
"his heart is changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and
I fear you don't fully apprehend the change that has taken place
in him."

"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change.  We
have always been friendly, and now..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
responding with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the
countess, and mentally balancing the question with which of the
two ministers she was most intimate, so as to know about which to
ask her to speak for him.

"The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love
for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only
intensify love in his heart.  But I am afraid you do not
understand me.  Won't you have some tea?" she said, with her eyes
indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on a tray.

"Not quite, countess.  Of course, his misfortune..."

"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when
his heart was made new, was filled full of it," she said, gazing
with eyes full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes
are a matter so private that no one, even the most intimate
friend, would care to speak of them."

"On the contrary!  We ought to speak freely and help one
another."

"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of
convictions, and besides..." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy
truth."

"Oh, no, of course; but..." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in
confusion.  He understood at last that they were talking of
religion.

"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia
Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round.  Landau was sitting at the
window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head
drooping.  Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised
his head and smiled a smile of childlike artlessness.

"Don't take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly
moved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "I have observed..."
she was beginning, when a footman came into the room with a
letter.  Lidia Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and
excusing herself, wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity,
handed it to the man, and came back to the table.  "I have
observed," she went on, "that Moscow people, especially the men,
are more indifferent to religion than anyone."

"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of
being the firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him
with a weary smile.

"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.

"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating
smile.  "I hardly think that the time for such questions has come
yet for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.  "We ought not to think whether
we are ready or not ready.  God's grace is not guided by human
considerations: sometimes it comes not to those that strive for
it, and comes to those that are unprepared, like Saul."

"No, I believe it won't be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who
had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman.
Landau got up and came to them.

"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna,
gazing tenderly at him; "sit here with us."

"One has only not to close one's eyes to shut out the light,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.

"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever
in our hearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous
smile.

"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that
height," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in
admitting this religious height, but at the same time unable to
bring himself to acknowledge his free-thinking views before a
person who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might procure him the
coveted appointment.

"That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna.
"But that is a false idea.  There is no sin for believers, their
sin has been atoned for.  _Pardon,_" she added, looking at the
footman, who came in again with another letter.  She read it and
gave a verbal answer: "Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess's, say."
"For the believer sin is not," she went on.

"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile
clinging to his independence.

"There you have it--from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in his tone.  It was unmistakably a subject they
had discussed more than once before.  "What harm has been done by
the false interpretation of that passage!  Nothing holds men back
from belief like that misinterpretation.  'I have not works, so I
cannot believe,' though all the while that is not said.  But the
very opposite is said."

"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude
ideas of our monks....  Yet that is nowhere said.  It is far
simpler and easier," she added, looking at Oblonsky with the same
encouraging smile with which at court she encouraged youthful
maids of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings of the
court.

"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us.  We are saved by
faith," Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of
approval at her words.

_"Vous comprenez l'anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving
a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through
a shelf of books.

"I want to read him 'Safe and Happy,' or 'Under the Wing,'" she
said, looking inquiringly at Karenin.  And finding the book, and
sitting down again in her place, she opened it.  "It's very
short.  In it is described the way by which faith can be reached,
and the happiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it fills
the soul.  The believer cannot be unhappy because he is not
alone.  But you will see."  She was just settling herself to read
when the footman came in again.  "Madame Borozdina?  Tell her,
tomorrow at two o'clock.  Yes," she said, putting her finger in
the place in the book, and gazing before her with her fine
pensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts.  You know Marie
Sanina?  You know about her trouble?  She lost her only child.
She was in despair.  And what happened?  She found this
comforter, and she thanks God now for the death of her child.
Such is the happiness faith brings!"

"Oh, yes, that is most..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they
were going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his
faculties.  "No, I see I'd better not ask her about anything
today," he thought.  "If only I can get out of this without
putting my foot in it!"

"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
addressing Landau; "you don't know English, but it's short."

"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and
he closed his eyes.  Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna
exchanged meaningful glances, and the reading began.



Chapter 22


Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange
talk which he was hearing for the first time.  The complexity of
Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing
him out of his Moscow stagnation.  But he liked these
complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew
and was at home in.  In these unfamiliar surroundings he was
puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his bearings.  As he
listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful,
artless--or perhaps artful, he could not decide which--eyes of
Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious
of a peculiar heaviness in his head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head.  "Marie
Sanina is glad her child's dead....  How good a smoke would be
now!...  To be saved, one need only believe, and the monks
don't know how the thing's to be done, but Countess Lidia
Ivanovna does know....  And why is my head so heavy?  Is it the
cognac, or all this being so queer?  Anyway, I fancy I've done
nothing unsuitable so far.  But anyway, it won't do to ask her
now.  They say they make one say one's prayers.  I only hope
they won't make me!  That'll be too imbecile.  And what stuff it
is she's reading! but she has a good accent.  Landau--Bezzubov--
what's he Bezzubov for?"  All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became
aware that his lower jaw was uncontrollably forming a yawn.  He
pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and shook himself
together.  But soon after he became aware that he was dropping
asleep and on the very point of snoring.  He recovered himself at
the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was
saying "he's asleep."  Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay,
feeling guilty and caught.  But he was reassured at once by
seeing that the words "he's asleep" referred not to him, but to
Landau.  The Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch's being asleep would have offended them,
as he thought (though even this, he thought, might not be so, as
everything seemed so queer), while Landau's being asleep
delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of
her silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling
Karenin not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la
main.  Vous voyez?  Sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in
again.  "Not at home."

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his
head on the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on
his knee, made faint movements, as though trying to catch
something.  Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move
carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his
hand in the Frenchman's hand.  Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too,
and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake himself up if he were
asleep, he looked first at one and then at the other.  It was all
real.  Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was getting worse
and worse.

_"Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande,
qu'elle sorte!  Qu'elle sorte!"_ articulated the Frenchman,
without opening his eyes.

_"Vous m'excuserez, mais vous voyez....  Revenez vers dix heures,
encore mieux demain."_

_"Qu'elle sorte!"_ repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

_"C'est moi, n'est-ce pas?"_ And receiving an answer in the
affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had
meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister's
affairs, caring for nothing, but filled with the sole desire to
get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into
the street as though from a plague-stricken house.  For a long
while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, trying to recover
his spirits.

At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and
afterwards at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan
Arkadyevitch felt a little refreshed in the atmosphere he was
used to.  But still he felt quite unlike himself all that
evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky's, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy.  She wrote to him that she
was very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and
begged him to come next day.  He had scarcely read this note, and
frowned at its contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp
of the servants, carrying something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look.  It was the rejuvenated
Pyotr Oblonsky.  He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs;
but he told them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with him into his room
and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, and
fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened
rarely with him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep.
Everything he could recall to his mind, everything was
disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it were something
shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at Countess
Lidia Ivanovna's.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer,
refusing to grant Anna's divorce, and he understood that this
decision was based on what the Frenchman had said in his real or
pretended trance.



Chapter 23


In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there
must necessarily be either complete division between the husband
and wife, or loving agreement.  When the relations of a couple
are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other, no sort of
enterprise can be undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both
husband and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither
complete division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the
heat and dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare
of summer, and all the trees in the boulevards had long since
been in full leaf, and the leaves were covered with dust.  But
they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to
do long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both
loathed it, because of late there had been no agreement between
them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and
all efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead
of removing it.  It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind
on the conviction that his love had grown less; in his, on regret
that he had put himself for her sake in a difficult position,
which she, instead of lightening, made still more difficult.
Neither of them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance,
but they considered each other in the wrong, and tried on every
pretext to prove this to one another.

In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas,
desires, with all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one
thing--love for women, and that love, she felt, ought to be
entirely concentrated on her alone.  That love was less;
consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of
his love to other women or to another woman--and she was jealous.
She was jealous not of any particular woman but of the decrease
of his love.  Not having got an object for her jealousy, she was
on the lookout for it.  At the slightest hint she transferred her
jealousy from one object to another.  At one time she was jealous
of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his old
bachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might
meet; then she was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might
want to marry, for whose sake he would break with her.  And this
last form of jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he
had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother
knew him so little that she had had the audacity to try and
persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and
found grounds for indignation in everything.  For everything that
was difficult in her position she blamed him.  The agonizing
condition of suspense she had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and
indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude--she put it all
down to him.  If he had loved her he would have seen all the
bitterness of her position, and would have rescued her from it.
For her being in Moscow and not in the country, he was to blame
too.  He could not live buried in the country as she would have
liked to do.  He must have society, and he had put her in this
awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see.  And
again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her
son.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time
did not soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of
complacency, of self-confidence, which had not been of old,
and which exasperated her.

It was dusk.  Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back
from a bachelor dinner.  She walked up and down in his study (the
room where the noise from the street was least heard), and
thought over every detail of their yesterday's quarrel.  Going
back from the well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to
what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its
origin.  For a long while she could hardly believe that their
dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so
little moment to either.  But so it actually had been.  It all
arose from his laughing at the girls' high schools, declaring
they were useless, while she defended them.  He had spoken
slightingly of women's education in general, and had said that
Hannah, Anna's English protegée, had not the slightest need to
know anything of physics.

This irritated Anna.  She saw in this a contemptuous reference to
her occupations.  And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him
back for the pain he had given her.  "I don't expect you to
understand me, my feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but
simple delicacy I did expect," she said.

And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant.  She could not recall her answer, but at that point,
with an unmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:

"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that's
true, because I see it's unnatural."

The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up
for herself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life,
the injustice with which he had accused her of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused her.

"I am very sorry that nothing but what's coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of
the room.

When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not
referred to the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been
smoothed over, but was not at an end.

Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely
and wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to
forget it all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she
wanted to throw the blame on herself and to justify him.

"I am myself to blame.  I'm irritable, I'm insanely jealous.  I
will make it up with him, and we'll go away to the country; there
I shall be more at peace."

"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her
most of all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound
her with which it was said.  "I know what he meant; he meant--
unnatural, not loving my own daughter, to love another person's
child.  What does he know of love for children, of my love for
Seryozha, whom I've sacrificed for him?  But that wish to wound
me!  No, he loves another woman, it must be so."

And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind,
she had gone round the same circle that she had been round so
often before, and had come back to her former state of
exasperation, she was horrified at herself.  "Can it be
impossible?  Can it be beyond me to control myself?" she said to
herself, and began again from the beginning.  "He's truthful,
he's honest, he loves me.  I love him, and in a few days the
divorce will come.  What more do I want?  I want peace of mind
and trust, and I will take the blame on myself.  Yes, now when he
comes in, I will tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong,
and we will go away tomorrow."

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by
irritability, she rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up
for packing their things for the country.

At ten o'clock Vronsky came in.



Chapter 24


"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a
penitent and meek expression.

"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in
one of her good moods.  He was used by now to these transitions,
and he was particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a
specially good humor himself.

"What do I see?  Come, that's good!" he said, pointing to the
boxes in the passage.

"Yes, we must go.  I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I
longed to be in the country.  There's nothing to keep you, is
there?"

"It's the one thing I desire.  I'll be back directly, and we'll
talk it over; I only want to change my coat.  Order some tea."

And he went into his room.

There was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come,
that's good," as one says to a child when it leaves off being
naughty, and still more mortifying was the contrast between her
penitent and his self-confident tone; and for one instant she
felt the lust of strife rising up in her again, but making an
effort she conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly as
before.

When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had
prepared beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for
going away.

"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said.
"Why wait here for the divorce?  Won't it be just the same in the
country?  I can't wait any longer!  I don't want to go on hoping,
I don't want to hear anything about the divorce.  I have made up
my mind it shall not have any more influence on my life.  Do you
agree?"

"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.

"What did you do?  Who was there?" she said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests.  "The dinner was
first rate, and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough,
but in Moscow they can never do anything without something
_ridicule_.  A lady of a sort appeared on the scene, teacher of
swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her
skill."

"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous
too.  So when shall we go?"

"What an absurd fancy!  Why, did she swim in some special way,
then?" said Anna, not answering.

"There was absolutely nothing in it.  That's just what I say, it
was awfully stupid.  Well, then, when do you think of going?"

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some
unpleasant idea.

"When?  Why, the sooner the better!  By tomorrow we shan't be
ready.  The day after tomorrow."

"Yes...oh, no, wait a minute!  The day after to-morrow's Sunday,
I have to be at maman's," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as
soon as he uttered his mother's name he was aware of her intent,
suspicious eyes.  His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion.  She
flushed hotly and drew away from him.  It was now not the Queen
of Sweden's swimming-mistress who filled Anna's imagination, but
the young Princess Sorokina.  She was staying in a village near
Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

"Can't you go tomorrow?" she said.

"Well, no!  The deeds and the money for the business I'm going
there for I can't get by tomorrow," he answered.

"If so, we won't go at all."

"But why so?"

"I shall not go later.  Monday or never!"

"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement.  "Why, there's
no meaning in it!"

"There's no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for
me.  You don't care to understand my life.  The one thing that I
cared for here was Hannah.  You say it's affectation.  Why, you
said yesterday that I don't love my daughter, that I love this
English girl, that it's unnatural.  I should like to know what
life there is for me that could be natural!"

For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and
was horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution.
But even though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not
restrain herself, could not keep herself from proving to him that
he was wrong, could not give way to him.

"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion."

"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you
don't tell the truth?"

"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly,
restraining his rising anger.  "It's a great pity if you can't
respect..."

"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should
be.  And if you don't love me any more, it would be better and
more honest to say so."

"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from
his chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking
deliberately: "What do you try my patience for?" looking as
though he might have said much more, but was restraining himself.
"It has limits."

"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his
cruel, menacing eyes.

"I mean to say..." he was beginning, but he checked himself.  "I
must ask what it is you want of me?"

"What can I want?  All I can want is that you should not desert
me, as you think of doing," she said, understanding all he had
not uttered.  "But that I don't want; that's secondary.  I want
love, and there is none.  So then all is over."

She turned towards the door.

"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines
of his brows, though he held her by the hand.  "What is it all
about?  I said that we must put off going for three days, and on
that you told me I was lying, that I was not an honorable man."

"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having
sacrificed everything for me," she said, recalling the words of a
still earlier quarrel, "that he's worse than a dishonorable man--
he's a heartless man."

"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go
her hand.

"He hates me, that's clear," she thought, and in silence, without
looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room.
"He loves another woman, that's even clearer," she said to
herself as she went into her own room.  "I want love, and there
is none.  So, then, all is over."  She repeated the words she had
said, "and it must be ended."

"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair
before the looking glass.

Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had
brought her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what
_he_ was doing now alone in his study; whether this was the final
quarrel, or whether reconciliation were still possible; and of
what all her old friends at Petersburg would say of her now; and
of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other
ideas of what would happen now after this rupture, came into her
head; but she did not give herself up to them with all her heart.
At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea that alone
interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the
time of her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which
never left her at that time.  "Why didn't I die?" and the words
and the feeling of that time came back to her.  And all at once
she knew what was in her soul.  Yes, it was that idea which alone
solved all.  "Yes, to die!...  And the shame and disgrace of
Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, it
will all be saved by death.  To die! and he will feel remorse;
will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."  With
the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left
hand, vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after
her death.

Approaching footsteps--his steps--distracted her attention.  As
though absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even
turn to him.

He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:

"Anna, we'll go the day after tomorrow, if you like.  I agree
to everything."

She did not speak.

"What is it?" he urged.

"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
herself any longer, she burst into sobs.

"Cast me off!" she articulated between her sobs.  "I'll go away
tomorrow...I'll do more.  What am I?  An immoral woman!  A stone
round your neck.  I don't want to make you wretched, I don't want
to!  I'll set you free.  You don't love me; you love someone
else!"

Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no
trace of foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased,
and never would cease, to love her; that he loved her more than
ever.

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing
her hands.  There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied
she caught the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet
on her hand.  And instantly Anna's despairing jealousy changed to
a despairing passion of tenderness.  She put her arms round him,
and covered with kisses his head, his neck, his hands.



Chapter 25


Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly
to work in the morning preparing for their departure.  Though it
was not settled whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as
they had each given way to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling
absolutely indifferent whether they went a day earlier or later.
She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out
of it, when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed
to go out.

"I'm going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money by
Yegorov.  And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.

Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to
his mother's gave her a pang.

"No, I shan't be ready by then myself," she said; and at once
reflected, "so then it was possible to arrange to do as I
wished."  "No, do as you meant to do.  Go into the dining room,
I'm coming directly.  It's only to turn out those things that
aren't wanted," she said, putting something more on the heap of
frippery that lay in Annushka's arms.

Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-
room.

"You wouldn't believe how distasteful these rooms have become to
me," she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee.  "There's
nothing more awful than these _chambres garnies_.  There's no
individuality in them, no soul.  These clocks, and curtains, and,
worst of all, the wallpapers--they're a nightmare.  I think of
Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land.  You're not sending the
horses off yet?"

"No, they will come after us.  Where are you going to?"

"I wanted to go to Wilson's to take some dresses to her.  So it's
really to be tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but
suddenly her face changed.

Vronsky's valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a
telegram from Petersburg.  There was nothing out of the way in
Vronsky's getting a telegram, but he said, as though anxious to
conceal something from her, that the receipt was in his study,
and he turned hurriedly to her.

"By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all."

"From whom is the telegram?" she asked, not hearing him.

"From Stiva," he answered reluctantly.

"Why didn't you show it to me?  What secret can there be between
Stiva and me?"

Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the
telegram.

"I didn't want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a
passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?"

"About the divorce?"

"Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet.
He has promised a decisive answer in a day or two.  But here it
is; read it."

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what
Vronsky had told her.  At the end was added: "Little hope; but
I will do everything possible and impossible."

"I said yesterday that it's absolutely nothing to me when I get,
or whether I never get, a divorce," she said, flushing crimson.
"There was not the slightest necessity to hide it from me."  "So
he may hide and does hide his correspondence with women from me,"
she thought.

"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky;
"I believe he's won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay,
about sixty thousand."

"No," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this
change of subject that he was irritated, "why did you suppose
that this news would affect me so, that you must even try to
hide it?  I said I don't want to consider it, and I should have
liked you to care as little about it as I do."

"I care about it because I like definiteness," he said.

"Definiteness is not in the form but the love," she said, more
and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool
composure in which he spoke.  "What do you want it for?"

"My God! love again," he thought, frowning.

"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children's in the
future."

"There won't be children in the future."

"That's a great pity," he said.

"You want it for the children's sake, but you don't think of me?"
she said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said,
"_for your sake_ and the children's."

The question of the possibility of having children had long been
a subject of dispute and irritation to her.  His desire to have
children she interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.

"Oh, I said: for your sake.  Above all for your sake," he
repeated, frowning as though in pain, "because I am certain that
the greater part of your irritability comes from the
indefiniteness of the position."

"Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred
for me is apparent," she thought, not hearing his words, but
watching with terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her
out of his eyes.

"The cause is not that," she said, "and, indeed, I don't see how
the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am
completely in your power.  What indefiniteness is there in the
position? on the contrary..."

"I am very sorry that you don't care to understand," he
interrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his
thought.  "The indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I
am free."

"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," she said,
and turning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.

She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it
to her lips.  After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and
by his expression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her
hand, and her gesture, and the sound made by her lips.

"I don't care in the least what your mother thinks, and what
match she wants to make for you," she said, putting the cup down
with a shaking hand.

"But we are not talking about that."

"Yes, that's just what we are talking about.  And let me tell you
that a heartless woman, whether she's old or not old, your mother
or anyone else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not
consent to know her."

"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."

"A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son's happiness
and honor lie has no heart."

"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of
my mother, whom I respect," he said, raising his voice and
looking sternly at her.

She did not answer.  Looking intently at him, at his face, his
hands, she recalled all the details of their reconciliation the
previous day, and his passionate caresses.  "There, just such
caresses he has lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on
other women!" she thought.

"You don't love your mother.  That's all talk, and talk, and
talk!" she said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.

"Even if so, you must..."

"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have
gone away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room.  Anna
greeted him and remained.

Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was
standing at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful
consequences--why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances
before an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all--she did
not know.  But at once quelling the storm within her, she sat
down and began talking to their guest.

"Well, how are you getting on?  Has your debt been paid you?" she
asked Yashvin.

"Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan't get it all, but I shall get a
good half.  And when are you off?" said Yashvin, looking at
Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

"The day after tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.

"You've been meaning to go so long, though."

"But now it's quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight
in the face with a look which told him not to dream of the
possibility of reconciliation.

"Don't you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" she went on,
talking to Yashvin.

"I've never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether
I'm sorry for him or not.  You see, all my fortune's here"--he
touched his breast pocket--"and just now I'm a wealthy man.  But
today I'm going to the club, and I may come out a beggar.  You
see, whoever sits down to play with me--he wants to leave me
without a shirt to my back, and so do I him.  And so we fight it
out, and that's the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be
for your wife?"

Yashvin laughed.

"That's why I'm not married, and never mean to be."

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation
and glancing at Anna's smiling face.  Meeting his eyes, Anna's
face instantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were
saying to him:  "It's not forgotten.  It's all the same."

"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.

"Oh heavens! ever so many times!  But you see, some men can play
but only so that they can always lay down their cards when the
hour of a _rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only
so as not to be late for my cards in the evening.  That's how I
manage things."

"No, I didn't mean that, but the real thing."  She would have
said _Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in.  Anna got up and went
out of the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room.  She would
have pretended to be looking for something on the table, but
ashamed of making a pretense, she looked straight in his face
with cold eyes.

"What do you want?" she asked in French.

"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I've sold him," he said, in a
tone which said more clearly than words, "I've no time for
discussing things, and it would lead to nothing."

"I'm not to blame in any way," he thought.  "If she will punish
herself, _tant pis pour elle._"  But as he was going he fancied
that she said something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity
for her.

"Eh, Anna?" he queried.

"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.

"Oh, nothing, tant pis then," he thought, feeling cold again, and
he turned and went out.  As he was going out he caught a glimpse
in the looking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips.  He
even wanted to stop and to say some comforting word to her, but
his legs carried him out of the room before he could think what
to say.  The whole of that day he spent away from home, and when
he came in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna
Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in to her.



Chapter 26


Never before had a day been passed in quarrel.  Today was the
first time.  And this was not a quarrel.  It was the open
acknowledgment of complete coldness.  Was it possible to glance
at her as he had glanced when he came into the room for the
guarantee?--to look at her, see her heart was breaking with
despair, and go out without a word with that face of callous
composure?  He was not merely cold to her, he hated her because
he loved another woman--that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied,
too, the words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could
have said to her, and she grew more and more exasperated.

"I won't prevent you," he might say.  "You can go where you like.
You were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so
that you might go back to him.  Go back to him.  If you want
money, I'll give it to you.  How many roubles do you want?"

All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to
her in her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them,
as though he had actually said them.

"But didn't he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful
and sincere man?  Haven't I despaired for nothing many times
already?" she said to herself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson's, which occupied
two hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or
whether there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she
should go away at once or see him once more.  She was expecting
him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went to her own
room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said to
herself, "If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means
that he loves me still.  If not, it means that all is over, and
then I will decide what I'm to do!..."

In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the
entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the
servant; he believed what was told him, did not care to find out
more, and went to his own room.  So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole
means of bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing
him and of gaining the victory in that strife which the evil
spirit in possession of her heart was waging with him.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe,
getting or not getting a divorce from her husband--all that did
not matter.  The one thing that mattered was punishing him.  When
she poured herself out her usual dose of opium, and thought that
she had only to drink off the whole bottle to die, it seemed to
her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on
how he would suffer, and repent and love her memory when it would
be too late.  She lay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a
single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice of the
ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she
would be no more, when she would be only a memory to him.  "How
could I say such cruel things to her?" he would say.  "How could
I go out of the room without saying anything to her?  But now she
is no more.  She has gone away from us forever.  She is...."
Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered, pounced on the whole
cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows from the other side
swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows flitted back, but
then with fresh swiftness they darted forward, wavered,
commingled, and all was darkness.  "Death!" she thought.  And
such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not
realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of
the one that had burned down and gone out.  "No, anything--only
to live!  Why, I love him!  Why, he loves me!  This has been
before and will pass," she said, feeling that tears of joy at the
return to life were trickling down her cheeks.  And to escape
from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.

He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly.  She went up to him,
and holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at
him.  Now when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight
of him she could not keep back tears of tenderness.  But she knew
that if he waked up he would look at her with cold eyes,
convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her
love, she would have to prove to him that he had been wrong in
his treatment of her.  Without waking him, she went back, and
after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had
recurred several times in her dreams, even before her connection
with Vronsky.  A little old man with unkempt beard was doing
something bent down over some iron, muttering meaningless French
words, and she, as she always did in this nightmare (it was what
made the horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no
notice of her, but was doing something horrible with the iron--
over her.  And she waked up in a cold sweat.

When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though
veiled in mist.

"There was a quarrel.  Just what has happened several times.  I
said I had a headache, and he did not come in to see me.
Tomorrow we're going away; I must see him and get ready for the
journey," she said to herself.  And learning that he was in his
study, she went down to him.  As she passed through the
drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and
looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a
young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction
to the footman ringing the bell.  After a parley in the hall,
someone came upstairs, and Vronsky's steps could be heard passing
the drawing room.  He went rapidly downstairs.  Anna went again
to the window.  She saw him come out onto the steps without his
hat and go up to the carriage.  The young girl in the lilac hat
handed him a parcel.  Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted
suddenly.  The feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with
a fresh pang.  She could not understand now how she could have
lowered herself by spending a whole day with him in his house.
She went into his room to announce her determination.

"That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter.  They came and
brought me the money and the deeds from maman.  I couldn't get
them yesterday.  How is your head, better?" he said quietly, not
wishing to see and to understand the gloomy and solemn expression
of her face.

She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of
the room.  He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on
reading a letter.  She turned, and went deliberately out of the
room.  He still might have turned her back, but she had reached
the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible was the
rustling of the note paper as he turned it.

"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the
doorway, "we're going tomorrow for certain, aren't we?"

"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.

"Anna, we can't go on like this..."

"You, but not I," she repeated.

"This is getting unbearable!"

"You...you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words
were uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on
second thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth.  This
vulgar--as he thought it--threat of something vague exasperated
him.  "I've tried everything," he thought; "the only thing left
is not to pay attention," and he began to get ready to drive into
town, and again to his mother's to get her signature to the
deeds.

She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining
room.  At the drawing room he stood still.  But he did not turn
in to see her, he merely gave an order that the horse should be
given to Voytov if he came while he was away.  Then she heard the
carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came out again.
But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running
upstairs.  It was the valet running up for his gloves that had
been forgotten.  She went to the window and saw him take the
gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back he
said something to him.  Then without looking up at the window he
settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his
legs crossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the
corner.



Chapter 27


"He has gone!  It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the
window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the
darkness when the candle had flickered out, and of her fearful
dream mingling into one, filled her heart with cold terror.

"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang
the bell.  She was so afraid now of being alone, that without
waiting for the servant to come in, she went out to meet him.

"Inquire where the count has gone," she said.  The servant
answered that the count had gone to the stable.

"His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage
would be back immediately."

"Very good.  Wait a minute.  I'll write a note at once.  Send
Mihail with the note to the stables.  Make haste."

She sat down and wrote:

"I was wrong.  Come back home; I must explain.  For God's sake
come! I'm afraid."

She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant
out of the room, and went to the nursery.

"Why, this isn't it, this isn't he!  Where are his blue eyes, his
sweet, shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby,
rosy little girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha,
whom in the tangle of her ideas she had expected to see in the
nursery.  The little girl sitting at the table was obstinately
and violently battering on it with a cork, and staring aimlessly
at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.  Answering the English
nurse that she was quite well, and that she was going to the
country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and began
spinning the cork to show her.  But the child's loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so
vividly that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went
away.  "Can it be all over?  No, it cannot be!" she thought.  "He
will come back.  But how can he explain that smile, that
excitement after he had been talking to her?  But even if he
doesn't explain, I will believe.  If I don't believe, there's
only one thing left for me, and I can't."

She looked at her watch.  Twenty minutes had passed.  "By now he
has received the note and is coming back.  Not long, ten minutes
more....  But what if he doesn't come?  No, that cannot be.  He
mustn't see me with tear-stained eyes.  I'll go and wash.  Yes,
yes; did I do my hair or not?" she asked herself.  And she could
not remember.  She felt her head with her hand.  "Yes, my hair
has been done, but when I did it I can't in the least remember."
She could not believe the evidence of her hand, and went up to
the pier glass to see whether she really had done her hair.  She
certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
"Who's that?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the
swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a
scared way at her.  "Why, it's I!" she suddenly understood, and
looking round, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her,
and twitched her shoulders, shuddering.  Then she lifted her hand
to her lips and kissed it.

"What is it?  Why, I'm going out of my mind!" and she went into
her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she
stared at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.

"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as
though she understood.

"Darya Alexandrovna?  Yes, I'll go."

"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back.  He's coming, he'll
be here soon."  She took out her watch and looked at it.  "But
how could he go away, leaving me in such a state?  How can he
live, without making it up with me?"  She went to the window and
began looking into the street.  Judging by the time, he might be
back now.  But her calculations might be wrong, and she began
once more to recall when he had started and to count the minutes.

At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare
it with her watch, someone drove up.  Glancing out of the window,
she saw his carriage.  But no one came upstairs, and voices could
be heard below.  It was the messenger who had come back in the
carriage.  She went down to him.

"We didn't catch the count.  The count had driven off on the
lower city road."

"What do you say?  What!..." she said to the rosy, good-humored
Mihail, as he handed her back her note.

"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.

"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya's place, you know? and
bring an answer back immediately," she said to the messenger.

"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought.  "Yes, I'm going to
Dolly's, that's true or else I shall go out of my mind.  Yes, and
I can telegraph, too."  And she wrote a telegram.  "I absolutely
must talk to you; come at once."  After sending off the telegram,
she went to dress.  When she was dressed and in her hat, she
glanced again into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking
Annushka.  There was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured
little gray eyes.

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna?  Why, there's nothing out
of the way.  You drive out a little, and it'll cheer you up,"
said the maid.

"Yes, I'm going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up.
"And if there's a telegram while I'm away, send it on to Darya
Alexandrovna's...but no, I shall be back myself."

"Yes, I mustn't think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and
most of all, get out of this house," she said, feeling with
terror the strange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she
made haste to go out and get into the carriage.

"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys'."



Chapter 28


It was bright and sunny.  A fine rain had been falling all the
morning, and now it had not long cleared up.  The iron roofs, the
flags of the roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and
leather, the brass and the tinplate of the carriages--all
glistened brightly in the May sunshine.  It was three o'clock,
and the very liveliest time in the streets.

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly
swayed on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in
the midst of the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing
impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over the events of the last
days, and she saw her position quite differently from how it had
seemed at home.  Now the thought of death seemed no longer so
terrible and so clear to her, and death itself no longer seemed
so inevitable.  Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to
which she had lowered herself.  "I entreat him to forgive me.  I
have given in to him.  I have owned myself in fault.  What for?
Can't I live without him?"  And leaving unanswered the question
how she was going to live without him, she fell to reading the
signs on the shops.  "Office and warehouse.  Dental surgeon.
Yes, I'll tell Dolly all about it.  She doesn't like Vronsky.  I
shall be sick and ashamed, but I'll tell her.  She loves me, and
I'll follow her advice.  I won't give in to him; I won't let him
train me as he pleases.  Filippov, bun shop.  They say they send
their dough to Petersburg.  The Moscow water is so good for it.
Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of
seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa.  "Riding, too.
Was that really me, with red hands?  How much that seemed to me
then splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what
I had then has gone out of my reach forever!  Could I ever have
believed then that I could come to such humiliation?  How
conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he gets my note!
But I will show him....  How horrid that paint smells!  Why is it
they're always painting and building?  _Modes et robes,_" she read.
A man bowed to her.  It was Annushka's husband.  "Our parasites";
she remembered how Vronsky had said that.  "Our?  Why our?
What's so awful is that one can't tear up the past by its roots.
One can't tear it out, but one can hide one's memory of it.  And
I'll hide it."  And then she thought of her past with Alexey
Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the memory of it out of
her life.  "Dolly will think I'm leaving my second husband, and
so I certainly must be in the wrong.  As if I cared to be right!
I can't help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry.  But at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling
about.  "Love, most likely.  They don't know how dreary it is,
how low....  The boulevard and the children.  Three boys running,
playing at horses.  Seryozha!  And I'm losing everything and not
getting him back.  Yes, I'm losing everything, if he doesn't
return.  Perhaps he was late for the train and has come back by
now.  Longing for humiliation again!" she said to herself.  "No,
I'll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I'm unhappy, I
deserve this, I'm to blame, but still I'm unhappy, help me.
These horses, this carriage--how loathsome I am to myself in this
carriage--all his; but I won't see them again."

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and
mentally working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went
upstairs.

"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"Kitty!  Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna,
"the girl he thinks of with love.  He's sorry he didn't marry
her.  But me he thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had
anything to do with me."

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna
called.  Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had
interrupted their conversation.

"Well, so you've not gone away yet?  I meant to have come to
you," she said; "I had a letter from Stiva today."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"He writes that he can't make out quite what Alexey
Alexandrovitch wants, but he won't go away without a decisive
answer."

"I thought you had someone with you.  Can I see the letter?"

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed.  "She stayed in the
nursery.  She has been very ill."

"So I heard.  May I see the letter?"

"I'll get it directly.  But he doesn't refuse; on the contrary,
Stiva has hopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

"I haven't, and indeed I don't wish it," said Anna.

"What's this?  Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?"
thought Anna when she was alone.  "Perhaps she's right, too.  But
it's not for her, the girl who was in love with Vronsky, it's not
for her to show me that, even if it is true.  I know that in my
position I can't be received by any decent woman.  I knew that
from the first moment I sacrificed everything to him.  And this
is my reward!  Oh, how I hate him!  And what did I come here for?
I'm worse here, more miserable."  She heard from the next room
the sisters' voices in consultation.  "And what am I going to say
to Dolly now?  Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness,
submit to her patronizing?  No; and besides, Dolly wouldn't
understand.  And it would be no good my telling her.  It would
only be interesting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise
everyone and everything, how nothing matters to me now."

Dolly came in with the letter.  Anna read it and handed it back
in silence.

"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn't interest me in the
least."

"Oh, why so?  On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna.  She had never seen her in such a
strangely irritable condition.  "When are you going away?" she
asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did
not answer.

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door
and flushing red.

"Oh, what nonsense!  She's nursing, and things aren't going right
with her, and I've been advising her....  She's delighted.
She'll be here in a minute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at
lying.  "Yes, here she is."

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but
Dolly persuaded her.  Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked
up to her, blushing, and shook hands.

"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict
between her antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be
nice to her.  But as soon as she saw Anna's lovely and attractive
face, all feeling of antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet
me.  I'm used to everything.  You have been ill?  Yes, you are
changed," said Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes.  She
ascribed this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna,
who had once patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt
sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty's illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, getting up.

"Oh, when are you going?"

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile.
"I have heard so much of you from everyone, even from your
husband.  He came to see me, and I liked him exceedingly," she
said, unmistakably with malicious intent.  "Where is he?"

"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"Remember me to him, be sure you do."

"I'll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately
into her eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly."  And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with
Kitty, Anna went out hurriedly.

"She's just the same and just as charming!  She's very lovely!"
said Kitty, when she was alone with her sister.  "But there's
something piteous about her.  Awfully piteous!"

"Yes, there's something unusual about her today," said Dolly.
"When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost
crying."



Chapter 29


Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind
than when she set out from home.  To her previous tortures was
added now that sense of mortification and of being an outcast
which she had felt so distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Where to?  Home?" asked Pyotr.

"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible,
and curious!  What can he be telling the other with such warmth?"
she thought, staring at two men who walked by.  "Can one ever
tell anyone what one is feeling?  I meant to tell Dolly, and it's
a good thing I didn't tell her.  How pleased she would have been
at my misery!  She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling
would have been delight at my being punished for the happiness
she envied me for.  Kitty, she would have been even more pleased.
How I can see through her!  She knows I was more than usually
sweet to her husband.  And she's jealous and hates me.  And she
despises me.  In her eyes I'm an immoral woman.  If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me
...if I'd cared to.  And, indeed, I did care to.  There's someone
who's pleased with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat,
rubicund gentleman coming towards her.  He took her for an
acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy
head, and then perceived his mistake.  "He thought he knew me.
Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me.  I
don't know myself.  I know my appetites, as the French say.  They
want that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she
thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who
took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring face
with a towel.  "We all want what is sweet and nice.  If not
sweetmeats, then a dirty ice.  And Kitty's the same--if not
Vronsky, then Levin.  And she envies me, and hates me.  And we
all hate each other.  I Kitty, Kitty me.  Yes, that's the truth.
_'Tiutkin, coiffeur.'  Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._  I'll
tell him that when he comes," she thought and smiled.  But the
same instant she remembered that she had no one now to tell
anything amusing to.  "And there's nothing amusing, nothing
mirthful, really.  It's all hateful.  They're singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if
he were afraid of missing something.  Why these churches and this
singing and this humbug?  Simply to conceal that we all hate each
other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so
angrily.  Yashvin says, 'He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I
him of his.' Yes, that's the truth!"

She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that
she left off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew
up at the steps of her house.  It was only when she saw the
porter running out to meet her that she remembered she had sent
the note and the telegram.

"Is there an answer?" she inquired.

"I'll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into
his room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a
telegram.  "I can't come before ten o'clock.--Vronsky," she
read.

"And hasn't the messenger come back?"

"No," answered the porter.

"Then, since it's so, I know what I must do," she said, and
feeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within
her, she ran upstairs.  "I'll go to him myself.  Before going
away forever, I'll tell him all.  Never have I hated anyone as I
hate that man!" she thought.  Seeing his hat on the rack, she
shuddered with aversion.  She did not consider that his telegram
was an answer to her telegram and that he had not yet received
her note.  She pictured him to herself as talking calmly to his
mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings.
"Yes, I must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was
going.  She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings she had gone through in that awful house.  The servants,
the walls, the things in that house--all aroused repulsion and
hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he's not there,
then go there and catch him."  Anna looked at the railway
timetable in the newspapers.  An evening train went at two
minutes past eight.  "Yes, I shall be in time."  She gave orders
for the other horses to be put in the carriage, and packed in a
traveling-bag the things needed for a few days.  She knew she
would never come back here again.

Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined
that after what would happen at the station or at the countess's
house, she would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road
and stop there.

Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread
and cheese was enough to make her feel that all food was
disgusting.  She ordered the carriage and went out.  The house
threw a shadow now right across the street, but it was a bright
evening and still warm in the sunshine.  Annushka, who came down
with her things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage,
and the coachman, evidently out of humor, were all hateful to
her, and irritated her by their words and actions.

"I don't want you, Pyotr."

"But how about the ticket?"

"Well, as you like, it doesn't matter," she said crossly.

Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the
coachman to drive to the booking-office.



Chapter 30


"Here it is again!  Again I understand it all!" Anna said to
herself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly,
rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one
impression followed rapidly upon another.

"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried
to recall it.  "_'Tiutkin, coiffeur?'_--no, not that.  Yes, of what
Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one
thing that holds men together.  No, it's a useless journey you're
making," she said, mentally addressing a party in a coach and
four, evidently going for an excursion into the country.  "And
the dog you're taking with you will be no help to you.  You can't
get away from yourselves."  Turning her eyes in the direction
Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost dead
drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.  "Come,
he's found a quicker way," she thought.  "Count Vronsky and I did
not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from
it."  And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light
in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him,
which she had hitherto avoided thinking about.  "What was it he
sought in me?  Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity."
She remembered his words, the expression of his face, that
recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of their
connection.  And everything now confirmed this.  "Yes, there was
the triumph of success in him.  Of course there was love too, but
the chief element was the pride of success.  He boasted of me.
Now that's over.  There's nothing to be proud of.  Not to be
proud of, but to be ashamed of.  He has taken from me all he
could, and now I am no use to him.  He is weary of me and is
trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.  He let that
out yesterday--he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn his
ships.  He loves me, but how?  The zest is gone, as the English
say.  That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much
pleased with himself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk,
riding on a riding school horse.  "Yes, there's not the same
flavor about me for him now.  If I go away from him, at the
bottom of his heart he will be glad."

This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the
piercing light, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and
human relations.

"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is
waning and waning, and that's why we're drifting apart."  She
went on musing.  "And there's no help for it.  He is everything
for me, and I want him more and more to give himself up to me
entirely.  And he wants more and more to get away from me.  We
walked to meet each other up to the time of our love, and then we
have been irresistibly drifting in different directions.  And
there's no altering that.  He tells me I'm insanely jealous, and
I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it's not true.
I'm not jealous, but I'm unsatisfied.  But..." she opened her
lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement,
aroused by the thought that suddenly struck her.  "If I could be
anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but his
caresses; but I can't and I don't care to be anything else.  And
by that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me,
and it cannot be different.  Don't I know that he wouldn't
deceive me, that he has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that
he's not in love with Kitty, that he won't desert me!  I know all
that, but it makes it no better for me.  If without loving me,
from _duty_ he'll be good and kind to me, without what I want,
that's a thousand times worse than unkindness!  That's--hell!
And that's just how it is.  For a long while now he hasn't loved
me.  And where love ends, hate begins.  I don't know these
streets at all.  Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses
....  And in the houses always people and people....  How many of
them, no end, and all hating each other!  Come, let me try and
think what I want, to make me happy.  Well?  Suppose I am
divorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I
marry Vronsky."  Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once
pictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive
before her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in
his white hands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers,
and remembering the feeling which had existed between them, and
which was also called love, she shuddered with loathing.  "Well,
I'm divorced, and become Vronsky's wife.  Well, will Kitty cease
looking at me as she looked at me today?  No.  And will Seryozha
leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands?  And is
there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me?  Is
there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
No, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation.
"Impossible!  We are drawn apart by life, and I make his
unhappiness, and he mine, and there's no altering him or me.
Every attempt has been made, the screw has come unscrewed.  Oh, a
beggar woman with a baby.  She thinks I'm sorry for her.  Aren't
we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and so to
torture ourselves and each other?  Schoolboys coming--laughing
Seryozha?" she thought.  "I thought, too, that I loved him, and
used to be touched by my own tenderness.  But I have lived
without him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret
the exchange till that love was satisfied."  And with loathing
she thought of what she meant by that love.  And the clearness
with which she saw life now, her own and all men's, was a
pleasure to her.  "It's so with me and Pyotr, and the coachman,
Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the
Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and
always," she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched
roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.

"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.

She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only
by a great effort she understood the question.

"Yes," she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red
bag in her hand, she got out of the carriage.

Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room,
she gradually recollected all the details of her position, and
the plans between which she was hesitating.  And again at the old
sore places, hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her
tortured, fearfully throbbing heart.  As she sat on the
star-shaped sofa waiting for the train, she gazed with aversion
at the people coming and going (they were all hateful to her),
and thought how she would arrive at the station, would write him
a note, and what she would write to him, and how he was at this
moment complaining to his mother of his position, not
understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room,
and what she would say to him.  Then she thought that life might
still be happy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and
how fearfully her heart was beating.



Chapter 31


A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same
time careful of the impression they were making, hurried by.
Pyotr, too, crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with
his dull, animal face, and came up to her to take her to the
train.  Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on the
platform, and one whispered something about her to another--
something vile, no doubt.  She stepped up on the high step, and
sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that had been
white.  Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat.  With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his
hat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell;
an impudent conductor slammed the door and the latch.  A
grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed
the woman, and was appalled at her hideousness), and a little
girl laughing affectedly ran down the platform.

"Katerina Andreevna, she's got them all, _ma tante!_" cried the
girl.

"Even the child's hideous and affected," thought Anna.  To avoid
seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the
opposite window of the empty carriage.  A misshapen-looking
peasant covered with dirt, in a cap from which his tangled hair
stuck out all round, passed by that window, stooping down to the
carriage wheels.  "There's something familiar about that hideous
peasant," thought Anna.  And remembering her dream, she moved
away to the opposite door, shaking with terror.  The conductor
opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

"Do you wish to get out?"

Anna made no answer.  The conductor and her two fellow-passengers
did not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face.  She went
back to her corner and sat down.  The couple seated themselves on
the opposite side, and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized
her clothes.  Both husband and wife seemed repulsive to Anna.
The husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not
with a view to smoking but to getting into conversation with her.
Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in French something
about caring less to smoke than to talk.  They made inane and
affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.  Anna
saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other.  And no one could have helped hating such miserable
monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage,
noise, shouting and laughter.  It was so clear to Anna that there
was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter
irritated her agonizingly, and she would have liked to stop up
her ears not to hear it.  At last the third bell rang, there was
a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man
in her carriage crossed himself.  "It would be interesting to ask
him what meaning he attaches to that," thought Anna, looking
angrily at him.  She looked past the lady out of the window at
the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or
stood on the platform.  The train, jerking at regular intervals
at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a
stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving
more smoothly and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the
rails.  The window was lighted up by the bright evening sun, and
a slight breeze fluttered the curtain.  Anna forgot her fellow
passengers, and to the light swaying of the train she fell to
thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.

"Yes, what did I stop at?  That I couldn't conceive a position in
which life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be
miserable, and that we all know it, and all invent means of
deceiving each other.  And when one sees the truth, what is one
to do?"

"That's what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries
him," said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously
pleased with her phrase.

The words seemed an answer to Anna's thoughts.

"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna.  And glancing
at the red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the
sickly wife considered herself misunderstood, and the husband
deceived her and encouraged her in that idea of herself.  Anna
seemed to see all their history and all the crannies of their
souls, as it were turning a light upon them.  But there was
nothing interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.

"Yes, I'm very much worried, and that's what reason was given me
for, to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the
light when there's nothing more to look at, when it's sickening
to look at it all?  But how?  Why did the conductor run along the
footboard, why are they shrieking, those young men in that train?
why are they talking, why are they laughing?  It's all falsehood,
all lying, all humbug, all cruelty!..."

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd
of passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers,
she stood on the platform, trying to think what she had come here
for, and what she meant to do.  Everything that had seemed to her
possible before was now so difficult to consider, especially in
this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leave her alone.
One moment porters ran up to her proffering their services, then
young men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and
talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting her dodged past on
the wrong side.  Remembering that she had meant to go on further
if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked if her
coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.

"Count Vronsky?  They sent up here from the Vronskys just this
minute, to meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter.  And what is
the coachman like?"

Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red
and cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of
having so successfully performed his commission, came up to her
and gave her a letter.  She broke it open, and her heart ached
before she had read it.

"I am very sorry your note did not reach me.  I will be home at
ten," Vronsky had written carelessly....

"Yes, that's what I expected!" she said to herself with an evil
smile.

"Very good, you can go home then," she said softly, addressing
Mihail.  She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart's
beating hindered her breathing.  "No, I won't let you make me
miserable," she thought menacingly, addressing not him, not
herself, but the power that made her suffer, and she walked along
the platform.

Two maidservants walking along the platform turned their heads,
staring at her and making some remarks about her dress.  "Real,"
they said of the lace she was wearing.  The young men would not
leave her in peace.  Again they passed by, peering into her face,
and with a laugh shouting something in an unnatural voice.  The
station-master coming up asked her whether she was going by
train.  A boy selling kvas never took his eyes off her.  "My God!
where am I to go?" she thought, going farther and farther along
the platform.  At the end she stopped.  Some ladies and children,
who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused in their
loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them.
She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the edge of
the platform.  A luggage train was coming in.  The platform began
to sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.

And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the
day she had first met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do.
With a rapid, light step she went down the steps that led from
the tank to the rails and stopped quite near the approaching
train.

She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and
chains and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly
moving up, and trying to measure the middle between the front and
back wheels, and the very minute when that middle point would be
opposite her.

"There," she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the
carriage, at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers--
"there, in the very middle, and I will punish him and escape
from everyone and from myself."

She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage
as it reached her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of
her hand delayed her, and she was too late; she missed the
moment.  She had to wait for the next carriage.  A feeling such
as she had known when about to take the first plunge in bathing
came upon her, and she crossed herself.  That familiar gesture
brought back into her soul a whole series of girlish and childish
memories, and suddenly the darkness that had covered everything
for her was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an
instant with all its bright past joys.  But she did not take her
eyes from the wheels of the second carriage.  And exactly at the
moment when the space between the wheels came opposite her, she
dropped the red bag, and drawing her head back into her
shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage, and lightly, as
though she would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees.
And at the same instant she was terror-stricken at what she was
doing.  "Where am I?  What am I doing?  What for?" She tried to
get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and merciless
struck her on the head and rolled her on her back.  "Lord,
forgive me all!" she said, feeling it impossible to struggle.  A
peasant muttering something was working at the iron above her.
And the light by which she had read the book filled with
troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more brightly
than ever before, lighted up for her all that had been in
darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was quenched forever.





PART 8




Chapter 1


Almost two months had passed.  The hot summer was half over, but
Sergey Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.

Sergey Ivanovitch's life had not been uneventful during this
time.  A year ago he had finished his book, the fruit of six
years' labor, "Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of
Government in Europe and Russia."  Several sections of this book
and its introduction had appeared in periodical publications, and
other parts had been read by Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his
circle, so that the leading ideas of the work could not be
completely novel to the public.  But still Sergey Ivanovitch had
expected that on its appearance his book would be sure to make a
serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great
stir in the scientific world.

After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been
published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.

Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned
indifference answered his friends' inquiries as to how the book
was going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the
book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with
strained attention, watching for the first impression his book
would make in the world and in literature.

But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no
impression whatever could be detected.  His friends who were
specialists and savants, occasionally--unmistakably from
politeness--alluded to it.  The rest of his acquaintances, not
interested in a book on a learned subject, did not talk of it at
all.  And society generally--just now especially absorbed in
other things--was absolutely indifferent.  In the press, too, for
a whole month there was not a word about his book.

Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary
for writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still
there was silence.

Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer
Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous
allusion to Koznishev's book, suggesting that the book had been
long ago seen through by everyone, and was a subject of general
ridicule.

At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a
serious review.  Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the
article.  He had met him once at Golubtsov's.

The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold
as a writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in
personal relations.

In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with
complete respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the
article.  The article was awful.

The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book
which could not possibly be put on it.  But he had selected
quotations so adroitly that for people who had not read the book
(and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely
clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley of high-flown
phrases, not even--as suggested by marks of interrogation--used
appropriately, and that the author of the book was a person
absolutely without knowledge of the subject.  And all this was
so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have disowned
such wit himself.  But that was just what was so awful.

In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey
Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic's arguments, he
did not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes
which were ridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately
trying to recall every detail of his meeting and conversation
with the author of the article.

"Didn't I offend him in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.

And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man
about something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey
Ivanovitch found the clue to explain the article.

This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both
in the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that
his six years' task, toiled at with such love and labor, had
gone, leaving no trace.

Sergey Ivanovitch's position was still more difficult from the
fact that, since he had finished his book, he had had no more
literary work to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater
part of his time.

Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic,
and he did not know what use to make of his energy.
Conversations in drawing rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and
committees--everywhere where talk was possible--took up part of
his time.  But being used for years to town life, he did not
waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced younger
brother did, when he was in Moscow.  He had a great deal of
leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.

Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from the
failure of his book, the various public questions of the
dissenting sects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine,
of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in
public interest by the Slavonic question, which had hitherto
rather languidly interested society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had been one of the first to raise this subject, threw himself
into it heart and soul.

In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was
talked of or written about just now but the Servian War.
Everything that the idle crowd usually does to kill time was done
now for the benefit of the Slavonic States.  Balls, concerts,
dinners, matchboxes, ladies' dresses, beer, restaurants--
everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.

From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch differed on various points.  He saw that the Slavonic
question had become one of those fashionable distractions which
succeed one another in providing society with an object and an
occupation.  He saw, too, that a great many people were taking up
the subject from motives of self-interest and self-advertisement.
He recognized that the newspapers published a great deal that was
superfluous and exaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting
attention and outbidding one another.  He saw that in this
general movement those who thrust themselves most forward and
shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting
under a sense of injury--generals without armies, ministers not
in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders
without followers.  He saw that there was a great deal in it that
was frivolous and absurd.  But he saw and recognized an
unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which
it was impossible not to sympathize.  The massacre of men who
were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited
sympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the
oppressors.  And the heroism of the Servians and Montenegrins
struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longing
to help their brothers not in word but in deed.

But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey
Ivanovitch.  That was the manifestation of public opinion.  The
public had definitely expressed its desire.  The soul of the
people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, found expression.  And the
more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable it seemed to
him that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to
create an epoch.

He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great
cause, and forgot to think about his book.  His whole time now
was engrossed by it, so that he could scarcely manage to answer
all the letters and appeals addressed to him.  He worked the
whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in July that
he prepared to go away to his brother's in the country.

He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart
of the people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the
sight of that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which,
like all residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully
persuaded.  Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his
promise to stay with Levin, and so he was going with him.



Chapter 2


Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station
of the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of
people that day, when, looking round for the groom who was
following with their things, they saw a party of volunteers
driving up in four cabs.  Ladies met them with bouquets of
flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd they went into the
station.

One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the
hall and addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.

"You too come to see them off?" she asked in French.

"No, I'm going away myself, princess.  To my brother's for a
holiday.  Do you always see them off?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with
a hardly perceptible smile.

"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess.  "Is it
true that eight hundred have been sent from us already?
Malvinsky wouldn't believe me."

"More than eight hundred.  If you reckon those who have been sent
not directly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"There! That's just what I said!" exclaimed the lady.  "And it's
true too, I suppose, that more than a million has been
subscribed?"

"Yes, princess."

"What do you say to today's telegram?  Beaten the Turks again."

"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.  They were speaking
of the last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three
days in succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and
that tomorrow a decisive engagement was expected.

"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go,
and they've made some difficulty, I don't know why.  I meant to
ask you; I know him; please write a note about his case.  He's
being sent by Countess Lidia Ivanovna."

Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew
about the young man, and going into the first-class waiting-room,
wrote a note to the person on whom the granting of leave of
absence depended, and handed it to the princess.

"You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one...is going by this
train?" said the princess with a smile full of triumph and
meaning, when he found her again and gave her the letter.

"I had heard he was going, but I did not know when.  By this
train?"

"I've seen him.  He's here: there's only his mother seeing him
off.  It's the best thing, anyway, that he could do."

"Oh, yes, of course."

While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the
dining room.  They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a
glass in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers.
"In the service of religion, humanity, and our brothers," the
gentleman said, his voice growing louder and louder; "to this
great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with her blessing.
_Jivio!_" he concluded, loudly and tearfully.

Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall,
almost carrying the princess off her legs.

"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and
beaming upon them with a delighted smile.  "Capitally, warmly
said, wasn't it?  Bravo!  And Sergey Ivanovitch!  Why, you ought
to have said something--just a few words, you know, to encourage
them; you do that so well," he added with a soft, respectful, and
discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a little by the
arm.

"No, I'm just off."

"Where to?"

"To the country, to my brother's," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Then you'll see my wife.  I've written to her, but you'll see
her first.  Please tell her that they've seen me and that it's
'all right,' as the English say.  She'll understand.  Oh, and be
so good as to tell her I'm appointed secretary of the
committee....  But she'll understand!  You know, _les petites
misères de la vie humaine,_" he said, as it were apologizing to
the princess.  "And Princess Myakaya--not Liza, but Bibish--is
sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses.  Did I tell you?"

"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indifferently.

"It's a pity you're going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Tomorrow we're giving a dinner to two who're setting off--
Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha.
They're both going.  Veslovsky's only lately married.  There's a
fine fellow for you!  Eh, princess?" he turned to the lady.

The princess looked at Koznishev without replying.  But the fact
that Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid
of him did not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Smiling, he stared at the feather in the princess's hat, and then
about him as though he were going to pick something up.  Seeing a
lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up and
put in a five-rouble note.

"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I've money
in my pocket," he said.  "And how about today's telegram?  Fine
chaps those Montenegrins!"

"You don't say so!" he cried, when the princess told him that
Vronsky was going by this train.  For an instant Stepan
Arkadyevitch's face looked sad, but a minute later, when,
stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked, he went into
the hall where Vronsky was, he had completely forgotten his own
despairing sobs over his sister's corpse, and he saw in Vronsky
only a hero and an old friend.

"With all his faults one can't refuse to do him justice," said
the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch
had left them.  "What a typically Russian, Slav nature!  Only,
I'm afraid it won't be pleasant for Vronsky to see him.  Say what
you will, I'm touched by that man's fate.  Do talk to him a
little on the way," said the princess.

"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."

"I never liked him.  But this atones for a great deal.  He's not
merely going himself, he's taking a squadron at his own expense."

"Yes, so I heard."

A bell sounded.  Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here he is!" said
the princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm
walked by, wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat.
Oblonsky was walking beside him, talking eagerly of something.

Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though
he did not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

Probably on Oblonsky's pointing them out, he looked round in the
direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing,
and without speaking lifted his hat.  His face, aged and worn by
suffering, looked stony.

Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared
into a compartment.

On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts
of "hurrah!" and _"jivio!"_  One of the volunteers, a tall, very
young man with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous,
bowing and waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his head.  Then
two officers emerged, bowing too, and a stout man with a big
beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.



Chapter 3


Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by
Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing,
and the train started.

At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men
singing "Hail to Thee!"  Again the volunteers bowed and poked
their heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them.
He had had so much to do with the volunteers that the type was
familiar to him and did not interest him.  Katavasov, whose
scientific work had prevented his having a chance of observing
them hitherto, was very much interested in them and questioned
Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and
talk to them himself.  At the next station Katavasov acted on
this suggestion.

At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the
acquaintance of the volunteers.  They were sitting in a corner of
the carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the
attention of the passengers and Katavasov as he got in was
