passionate soul; he was a fighter. He was fighting for the restoration
of his dying faith. He must have something to hold on to and believe,
and someone to believe in. What a strange picture that of Holbein's is!
Why, this is the street, and here's the house, No. 16.

The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of
the house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria
Alexeyevna at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.

Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and
crafty, piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her
visitor's name, he refused at first to answer, but in a moment he
changed his mind, and left strict instructions that it should be given
to Nastasia Philipovna. The urgency of his request seemed to impress
Madame Filisoff, and she put on a knowing expression, as if to say, "You
need not be afraid, I quite understand." The prince's name evidently
was a great surprise to her. He stood and looked absently at her for a
moment, then turned, and took the road back to his hotel. But he went
away not as he came. A great change had suddenly come over him. He went
blindly forward; his knees shook under him; he was tormented by "ideas";
his lips were blue, and trembled with a feeble, meaningless smile. His
demon was upon him once more.

What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of
moisture, his knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a
cold gloom? Was it because he had just seen these dreadful eyes again?
Why, he had left the Summer Garden on purpose to see them; that had been
his "idea." He had wished to assure himself that he would see them once
more at that house. Then why was he so overwhelmed now, having seen them
as he expected? just as though he had not expected to see them! Yes,
they were the very same eyes; and no doubt about it. The same that he
had seen in the crowd that morning at the station, the same that he
had surprised in Rogojin's rooms some hours later, when the latter had
replied to his inquiry with a sneering laugh, "Well, whose eyes were
they?" Then for the third time they had appeared just as he was getting
into the train on his way to see Aglaya. He had had a strong impulse to
rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words of the morning "Whose eyes
are they?" Instead he had fled from the station, and knew nothing more,
until he found himself gazing into the window of a cutler's shop, and
wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost more than sixty
copecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden under a
lime-tree, a wicked demon had come and whispered in his car: "Rogojin
has been spying upon you and watching you all the morning in a frenzy
of desperation. When he finds you have not gone to Pavlofsk--a terrible
discovery for him--he will surely go at once to that house in Petersburg
Side, and watch for you there, although only this morning you gave
your word of honour not to see HER, and swore that you had not come to
Petersburg for that purpose." And thereupon the prince had hastened off
to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin
there? He had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of
mind was gloomy and miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning
Rogojin had seemed to be trying to keep out of the way; but at the
station this afternoon he had stood out, he had concealed himself,
indeed, less than the prince himself; at the house, now, he had stood
fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with folded hands,
watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen. He had
stood there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a--a what?

And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead
of turning away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes
met? (Yes, their eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why,
he had himself wished to take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he
had himself determined to go to him on the morrow and tell him that he
had seen her, he had repudiated the demon as he walked to the house, and
his heart had been full of joy.

Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient
to justify the prince's terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon?
Something seen, but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful
presentiments? Yes, he was convinced of it--convinced of what? (Oh, how
mean and hideous of him to feel this conviction, this presentiment! How
he blamed himself for it!) "Speak if you dare, and tell me, what is the
presentiment?" he repeated to himself, over and over again. "Put it into
words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward that I
am!" The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. "How shall I
ever look this man in the face again? My God, what a day! And what a
nightmare, what a nightmare!"

There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the
Petersburg Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go
straight to Rogojin's, wait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and
contrition, and tell him of his distrust, and finish with it--once for
all.

But here he was back at his hotel.

How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing--its
corridor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it,
for some reason.

"What a regular old woman I am today," he had said to himself each time,
with annoyance. "I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes into
my head."

He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over
him. "I am a coward, a wretched coward," he said, and moved forward
again; but once more he paused.

Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the
exclusion of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained,
and he was no longer under the influence of a nightmare, he was able
to think of it calmly. It concerned the knife on Rogojin's table. "Why
should not Rogojin have as many knives on his table as he chooses?"
thought the prince, wondering at his suspicions, as he had done when he
found himself looking into the cutler's window. "What could it have to
do with me?" he said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to the
ground by a kind of paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the
stress of some humiliating recollection.

The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment
it was rendered doubly so by the fact that the thunder-storm had just
broken, and the rain was coming down in torrents.

And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close
to the stairs, apparently waiting.

There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was
standing back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but
the prince felt an irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and
that it was Rogojin. The man moved on up the stairs; a moment later the
prince passed up them, too. His heart froze within him. "In a minute or
two I shall know all," he thought.

The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along
which lay the guests' bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg
houses, it was narrow and very dark, and turned around a massive stone
column.

On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the
stairs allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide,
and in this niche the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed.
He thought he could distinguish a figure standing there. He would pass
by quickly and not look. He took a step forward, but could bear the
uncertainty no longer and turned his head.

The eyes--the same two eyes--met his! The man concealed in the niche had
also taken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.

Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round
towards the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.

Rogojin's eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his
countenance. His right hand was raised, and something glittered in it.
The prince did not think of trying to stop it. All he could remember
afterwards was that he seemed to have called out:

"Parfen! I won't believe it."

Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful
inner light illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet
he distinctly remembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange,
dreadful wail, which burst from his lips of its own accord, and which no
effort of will on his part could suppress.

Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out
everything.

He had fallen in an epileptic fit.


*****


As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially
the eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a
terrible cry breaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything
human seems to be blotted out, so that it is impossible to believe that
the man who has just fallen is the same who emitted the dreadful cry.
It seems more as though some other being, inside the stricken one,
had cried. Many people have borne witness to this impression; and many
cannot behold an epileptic fit without a feeling of mysterious terror
and dread.

Such a feeling, we must suppose, overtook Rogojin at this moment, and
saved the prince's life. Not knowing that it was a fit, and seeing
his victim disappear head foremost into the darkness, hearing his head
strike the stone steps below with a crash, Rogojin rushed downstairs,
skirting the body, and flung himself headlong out of the hotel, like a
raving madman.

The prince's body slipped convulsively down the steps till it rested at
the bottom. Very soon, in five minutes or so, he was discovered, and a
crowd collected around him.

A pool of blood on the steps near his head gave rise to grave fears. Was
it a case of accident, or had there been a crime? It was, however, soon
recognized as a case of epilepsy, and identification and proper measures
for restoration followed one another, owing to a fortunate circumstance.
Colia Ivolgin had come back to his hotel about seven o'clock, owing to
a sudden impulse which made him refuse to dine at the Epanchins',
and, finding a note from the prince awaiting him, had sped away to the
latter's address. Arrived there, he ordered a cup of tea and sat sipping
it in the coffee-room. While there he heard excited whispers of someone
just found at the bottom of the stairs in a fit; upon which he had
hurried to the spot, with a presentiment of evil, and at once recognized
the prince.

The sufferer was immediately taken to his room, and though he partially
regained consciousness, he lay long in a semi-dazed condition.

The doctor stated that there was no danger to be apprehended from the
wound on the head, and as soon as the prince could understand what
was going on around him, Colia hired a carriage and took him away
to Lebedeff's. There he was received with much cordiality, and the
departure to the country was hastened on his account. Three days later
they were all at Pavlofsk.

VI.

LEBEDEFF'S country-house was not large, but it was pretty and
convenient, especially the part which was let to the prince.

A row of orange and lemon trees and jasmines, planted in green tubs,
stood on the fairly wide terrace. According to Lebedeff, these trees
gave the house a most delightful aspect. Some were there when he bought
it, and he was so charmed with the effect that he promptly added to
their number. When the tubs containing these plants arrived at the villa
and were set in their places, Lebedeff kept running into the street to
enjoy the view of the house, and every time he did so the rent to be
demanded from the future tenant went up with a bound.

This country villa pleased the prince very much in his state of physical
and mental exhaustion. On the day that they left for Pavlofsk, that is
the day after his attack, he appeared almost well, though in reality he
felt very far from it. The faces of those around him for the last three
days had made a pleasant impression. He was pleased to see, not only
Colia, who had become his inseparable companion, but Lebedeff himself
and all the family, except the nephew, who had left the house. He was
also glad to receive a visit from General Ivolgin, before leaving St.
Petersburg.

It was getting late when the party arrived at Pavlofsk, but several
people called to see the prince, and assembled in the verandah. Gania
was the first to arrive. He had grown so pale and thin that the prince
could hardly recognize him. Then came Varia and Ptitsin, who were
rusticating in the neighbourhood. As to General Ivolgin, he scarcely
budged from Lebedeff's house, and seemed to have moved to Pavlofsk with
him. Lebedeff did his best to keep Ardalion Alexandrovitch by him, and
to prevent him from invading the prince's quarters. He chatted with
him confidentially, so that they might have been taken for old friends.
During those three days the prince had noticed that they frequently held
long conversations; he often heard their voices raised in argument on
deep and learned subjects, which evidently pleased Lebedeff. He seemed
as if he could not do without the general. But it was not only Ardalion
Alexandrovitch whom Lebedeff kept out of the prince's way. Since they
had come to the villa, he treated his own family the same. Upon the
pretext that his tenant needed quiet, he kept him almost in isolation,
and Muishkin protested in vain against this excess of zeal. Lebedeff
stamped his feet at his daughters and drove them away if they attempted
to join the prince on the terrace; not even Vera was excepted.

"They will lose all respect if they are allowed to be so free and easy;
besides it is not proper for them," he declared at last, in answer to a
direct question from the prince.

"Why on earth not?" asked the latter. "Really, you know, you are making
yourself a nuisance, by keeping guard over me like this. I get bored
all by myself; I have told you so over and over again, and you get on
my nerves more than ever by waving your hands and creeping in and out in
the mysterious way you do."

It was a fact that Lebedeff, though he was so anxious to keep everyone
else from disturbing the patient, was continually in and out of the
prince's room himself. He invariably began by opening the door a crack
and peering in to see if the prince was there, or if he had escaped;
then he would creep softly up to the arm-chair, sometimes making
Muishkin jump by his sudden appearance. He always asked if the patient
wanted anything, and when the latter replied that he only wanted to be
left in peace, he would turn away obediently and make for the door on
tip-toe, with deprecatory gestures to imply that he had only just looked
in, that he would not speak a word, and would go away and not intrude
again; which did not prevent him from reappearing in ten minutes or
a quarter of an hour. Colia had free access to the prince, at which
Lebedeff was quite disgusted and indignant. He would listen at the door
for half an hour at a time while the two were talking. Colia found this
out, and naturally told the prince of his discovery.

"Do you think yourself my master, that you try to keep me under lock and
key like this?" said the prince to Lebedeff. "In the country, at least,
I intend to be free, and you may make up your mind that I mean to see
whom I like, and go where I please."

"Why, of course," replied the clerk, gesticulating with his hands.

The prince looked him sternly up and down.

"Well, Lukian Timofeyovitch, have you brought the little cupboard that
you had at the head of your bed with you here?"

"No, I left it where it was."

"Impossible!"

"It cannot be moved; you would have to pull the wall down, it is so
firmly fixed."

"Perhaps you have one like it here?"

"I have one that is even better, much better; that is really why I
bought this house."

"Ah! What visitor did you turn away from my door, about an hour ago?"

"The-the general. I would not let him in; there is no need for him to
visit you, prince... I have the deepest esteem for him, he is a--a great
man. You don't believe it? Well, you will see, and yet, most excellent
prince, you had much better not receive him."

"May I ask why? and also why you walk about on tiptoe and always seem as
if you were going to whisper a secret in my ear whenever you come near
me?"

"I am vile, vile; I know it!" cried Lebedeff, beating his breast with a
contrite air. "But will not the general be too hospitable for you?"

"Too hospitable?"

"Yes. First, he proposes to come and live in my house. Well and good;
but he sticks at nothing; he immediately makes himself one of the
family. We have talked over our respective relations several times, and
discovered that we are connected by marriage. It seems also that you are
a sort of nephew on his mother's side; he was explaining it to me again
only yesterday. If you are his nephew, it follows that I must also be a
relation of yours, most excellent prince. Never mind about that, it is
only a foible; but just now he assured me that all his life, from the
day he was made an ensign to the 11th of last June, he has entertained
at least two hundred guests at his table every day. Finally, he went so
far as to say that they never rose from the table; they dined, supped,
and had tea, for fifteen hours at a stretch. This went on for thirty
years without a break; there was barely time to change the table-cloth;
directly one person left, another took his place. On feast-days he
entertained as many as three hundred guests, and they numbered seven
hundred on the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the Russian
Empire. It amounts to a passion with him; it makes one uneasy to hear of
it. It is terrible to have to entertain people who do things on such a
scale. That is why I wonder whether such a man is not too hospitable for
you and me."

"But you seem to be on the best of terms with him?"

"Quite fraternal--I look upon it as a joke. Let us be brothers-in-law,
it is all the same to me,--rather an honour than not. But in spite of
the two hundred guests and the thousandth anniversary of the Russian
Empire, I can see that he is a very remarkable man. I am quite sincere.
You said just now that I always looked as if I was going to tell you a
secret; you are right. I have a secret to tell you: a certain person has
just let me know that she is very anxious for a secret interview with
you."

"Why should it be secret? Not at all; I will call on her myself
tomorrow."

"No, oh no!" cried Lebedeff, waving his arms; "if she is afraid, it is
not for the reason you think. By the way, do you know that the monster
comes every day to inquire after your health?"

"You call him a monster so often that it makes me suspicious."

"You must have no suspicions, none whatever," said Lebedeff quickly. "I
only want you to know that the person in question is not afraid of him,
but of something quite, quite different."

"What on earth is she afraid of, then? Tell me plainly, without any more
beating about the bush," said the prince, exasperated by the other's
mysterious grimaces.

"Ah that is the secret," said Lebedeff, with a smile.

"Whose secret?"

"Yours. You forbade me yourself to mention it before you, most excellent
prince," murmured Lebedeff. Then, satisfied that he had worked up
Muishkin's curiosity to the highest pitch, he added abruptly: "She is
afraid of Aglaya Ivanovna."

The prince frowned for a moment in silence, and then said suddenly:

"Really, Lebedeff, I must leave your house. Where are Gavrila
Ardalionovitch and the Ptitsins? Are they here? Have you chased them
away, too?"

"They are coming, they are coming; and the general as well. I will open
all the doors; I will call all my daughters, all of them, this very
minute," said Lebedeff in a low voice, thoroughly frightened, and waving
his hands as he ran from door to door.

At that moment Colia appeared on the terrace; he announced that
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her three daughters were close behind him.

Moved by this news, Lebedeff hurried up to the prince.

"Shall I call the Ptitsins, and Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Shall I let the
general in?" he asked.

"Why not? Let in anyone who wants to see me. I assure you, Lebedeff, you
have misunderstood my position from the very first; you have been wrong
all along. I have not the slightest reason to hide myself from anyone,"
replied the prince gaily.

Seeing him laugh, Lebedeff thought fit to laugh also, and though much
agitated his satisfaction was quite visible.

Colia was right; the Epanchin ladies were only a few steps behind him.
As they approached the terrace other visitors appeared from Lebedeff's
side of the house-the Ptitsins, Gania, and Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

The Epanchins had only just heard of the prince's illness and of his
presence in Pavlofsk, from Colia; and up to this time had been in a
state of considerable bewilderment about him. The general brought the
prince's card down from town, and Mrs. Epanchin had felt convinced that
he himself would follow his card at once; she was much excited.

In vain the girls assured her that a man who had not written for six
months would not be in such a dreadful hurry, and that probably he had
enough to do in town without needing to bustle down to Pavlofsk to see
them. Their mother was quite angry at the very idea of such a thing, and
announced her absolute conviction that he would turn up the next day at
latest.

So next day the prince was expected all the morning, and at dinner, tea,
and supper; and when he did not appear in the evening, Mrs. Epanchin
quarrelled with everyone in the house, finding plenty of pretexts
without so much as mentioning the prince's name.

On the third day there was no talk of him at all, until Aglaya remarked
at dinner: "Mamma is cross because the prince hasn't turned up," to
which the general replied that it was not his fault.

Mrs. Epanchin misunderstood the observation, and rising from her place
she left the room in majestic wrath. In the evening, however, Colia came
with the story of the prince's adventures, so far as he knew them. Mrs.
Epanchin was triumphant; although Colia had to listen to a long lecture.
"He idles about here the whole day long, one can't get rid of him; and
then when he is wanted he does not come. He might have sent a line if he
did not wish to inconvenience himself."

At the words "one can't get rid of him," Colia was very angry, and
nearly flew into a rage; but he resolved to be quiet for the time and
show his resentment later. If the words had been less offensive he
might have forgiven them, so pleased was he to see Lizabetha Prokofievna
worried and anxious about the prince's illness.

She would have insisted on sending to Petersburg at once, for a certain
great medical celebrity; but her daughters dissuaded her, though they
were not willing to stay behind when she at once prepared to go and
visit the invalid. Aglaya, however, suggested that it was a little
unceremonious to go en masse to see him.

"Very well then, stay at home," said Mrs. Epanchin, "and a good thing
too, for Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming down and there will be no one at
home to receive him."

Of course, after this, Aglaya went with the rest. In fact, she had never
had the slightest intention of doing otherwise.

Prince S., who was in the house, was requested to escort the ladies.
He had been much interested when he first heard of the prince from the
Epanchins. It appeared that they had known one another before, and had
spent some time together in a little provincial town three months
ago. Prince S. had greatly taken to him, and was delighted with the
opportunity of meeting him again.

The general had not come down from town as yet, nor had Evgenie
Pavlovitch arrived.

It was not more than two or three hundred yards from the Epanchins'
house to Lebedeff's. The first disagreeable impression experienced by
Mrs. Epanchin was to find the prince surrounded by a whole assembly of
other guests--not to mention the fact that some of those present were
particularly detestable in her eyes. The next annoying circumstance was
when an apparently strong and healthy young fellow, well dressed,
and smiling, came forward to meet her on the terrace, instead of the
half-dying unfortunate whom she had expected to see.

She was astonished and vexed, and her disappointment pleased Colia
immensely. Of course he could have undeceived her before she started,
but the mischievous boy had been careful not to do that, foreseeing the
probably laughable disgust that she would experience when she found her
dear friend, the prince, in good health. Colia was indelicate enough to
voice the delight he felt at his success in managing to annoy Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with whom, in spite of their really amicable relations, he
was constantly sparring.

"Just wait a while, my boy!" said she; "don't be too certain of your
triumph." And she sat down heavily, in the arm-chair pushed forward by
the prince.

Lebedeff, Ptitsin, and General Ivolgin hastened to find chairs for
the young ladies. Varia greeted them joyfully, and they exchanged
confidences in ecstatic whispers.

"I must admit, prince, I was a little put out to see you up and about
like this--I expected to find you in bed; but I give you my word, I was
only annoyed for an instant, before I collected my thoughts properly. I
am always wiser on second thoughts, and I dare say you are the same.
I assure you I am as glad to see you well as though you were my own
son,--yes, and more; and if you don't believe me the more shame to you,
and it's not my fault. But that spiteful boy delights in playing all
sorts of tricks. You are his patron, it seems. Well, I warn you that
one fine morning I shall deprive myself of the pleasure of his further
acquaintance."

"What have I done wrong now?" cried Colia. "What was the good of telling
you that the prince was nearly well again? You would not have believed
me; it was so much more interesting to picture him on his death-bed."

"How long do you remain here, prince?" asked Madame Epanchin.

"All the summer, and perhaps longer."

"You are alone, aren't you,--not married?"

"No, I'm not married!" replied the prince, smiling at the ingenuousness
of this little feeler.

"Oh, you needn't laugh! These things do happen, you know! Now then--why
didn't you come to us? We have a wing quite empty. But just as you like,
of course. Do you lease it from HIM?--this fellow, I mean," she added,
nodding towards Lebedeff. "And why does he always wriggle so?"

At that moment Vera, carrying the baby in her arms as usual, came out of
the house, on to the terrace. Lebedeff kept fidgeting among the chairs,
and did not seem to know what to do with himself, though he had no
intention of going away. He no sooner caught sight of his daughter, than
he rushed in her direction, waving his arms to keep her away; he even
forgot himself so far as to stamp his foot.

"Is he mad?" asked Madame Epanchin suddenly.

"No, he..."

"Perhaps he is drunk? Your company is rather peculiar," she added, with
a glance at the other guests....

"But what a pretty girl! Who is she?"

"That is Lebedeff's daughter--Vera Lukianovna."

"Indeed? She looks very sweet. I should like to make her acquaintance."

The words were hardly out of her mouth, when Lebedeff dragged Vera
forward, in order to present her.

"Orphans, poor orphans!" he began in a pathetic voice.

"The child she carries is an orphan, too. She is Vera's sister, my
daughter Luboff. The day this babe was born, six weeks ago, my wife
died, by the will of God Almighty.... Yes... Vera takes her mother's
place, though she is but her sister... nothing more... nothing more..."

"And you! You are nothing more than a fool, if you'll excuse me! Well!
well! you know that yourself, I expect," said the lady indignantly.

Lebedeff bowed low. "It is the truth," he replied, with extreme respect.

"Oh, Mr. Lebedeff, I am told you lecture on the Apocalypse. Is it true?"
asked Aglaya.

"Yes, that is so... for the last fifteen years."

"I have heard of you, and I think read of you in the newspapers."

"No, that was another commentator, whom the papers named. He is dead,
however, and I have taken his place," said the other, much delighted.

"We are neighbours, so will you be so kind as to come over one day and
explain the Apocalypse to me?" said Aglaya. "I do not understand it in
the least."

"Allow me to warn you," interposed General Ivolgin, "that he is the
greatest charlatan on earth." He had taken the chair next to the girl,
and was impatient to begin talking. "No doubt there are pleasures and
amusements peculiar to the country," he continued, "and to listen to a
pretended student holding forth on the book of the Revelations may be
as good as any other. It may even be original. But... you seem to
be looking at me with some surprise--may I introduce myself--General
Ivolgin--I carried you in my arms as a baby--"

"Delighted, I'm sure," said Aglaya; "I am acquainted with Varvara
Ardalionovna and Nina Alexandrovna." She was trying hard to restrain
herself from laughing.

Mrs. Epanchin flushed up; some accumulation of spleen in her suddenly
needed an outlet. She could not bear this General Ivolgin whom she had
once known, long ago--in society.

"You are deviating from the truth, sir, as usual!" she remarked, boiling
over with indignation; "you never carried her in your life!"

"You have forgotten, mother," said Aglaya, suddenly. "He really did
carry me about,--in Tver, you know. I was six years old, I remember.
He made me a bow and arrow, and I shot a pigeon. Don't you remember
shooting a pigeon, you and I, one day?"

"Yes, and he made me a cardboard helmet, and a little wooden sword--I
remember!" said Adelaida.

"Yes, I remember too!" said Alexandra. "You quarrelled about the wounded
pigeon, and Adelaida was put in the corner, and stood there with her
helmet and sword and all."

The poor general had merely made the remark about having carried Aglaya
in his arms because he always did so begin a conversation with young
people. But it happened that this time he had really hit upon the truth,
though he had himself entirely forgotten the fact. But when Adelaida and
Aglaya recalled the episode of the pigeon, his mind became filled
with memories, and it is impossible to describe how this poor old man,
usually half drunk, was moved by the recollection.

"I remember--I remember it all!" he cried. "I was captain then. You were
such a lovely little thing--Nina Alexandrovna!--Gania, listen! I was
received then by General Epanchin."

"Yes, and look what you have come to now!" interrupted Mrs. Epanchin.
"However, I see you have not quite drunk your better feelings away. But
you've broken your wife's heart, sir--and instead of looking after
your children, you have spent your time in public-houses and debtors'
prisons! Go away, my friend, stand in some corner and weep, and bemoan
your fallen dignity, and perhaps God will forgive you yet! Go, go! I'm
serious! There's nothing so favourable for repentance as to think of the
past with feelings of remorse!"

There was no need to repeat that she was serious. The general, like all
drunkards, was extremely emotional and easily touched by recollections
of his better days. He rose and walked quietly to the door, so meekly
that Mrs. Epanchin was instantly sorry for him.

"Ardalion Alexandrovitch," she cried after him, "wait a moment, we are
all sinners! When you feel that your conscience reproaches you a little
less, come over to me and we'll have a talk about the past! I dare say I
am fifty times more of a sinner than you are! And now go, go, good-bye,
you had better not stay here!" she added, in alarm, as he turned as
though to come back.

"Don't go after him just now, Colia, or he'll be vexed, and the benefit
of this moment will be lost!" said the prince, as the boy was hurrying
out of the room.

"Quite true! Much better to go in half an hour or so said Mrs. Epanchin.

"That's what comes of telling the truth for once in one's life!" said
Lebedeff. "It reduced him to tears."

"Come, come! the less YOU say about it the better--to judge from all I
have heard about you!" replied Mrs. Epanchin.

The prince took the first opportunity of informing the Epanchin ladies
that he had intended to pay them a visit that day, if they had not
themselves come this afternoon, and Lizabetha Prokofievna replied that
she hoped he would still do so.

By this time some of the visitors had disappeared.

Ptitsin had tactfully retreated to Lebedeff's wing; and Gania soon
followed him.

The latter had behaved modestly, but with dignity, on this occasion
of his first meeting with the Epanchins since the rupture. Twice Mrs.
Epanchin had deliberately examined him from head to foot; but he had
stood fire without flinching. He was certainly much changed, as anyone
could see who had not met him for some time; and this fact seemed to
afford Aglaya a good deal of satisfaction.

"That was Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who just went out, wasn't it?" she
asked suddenly, interrupting somebody else's conversation to make the
remark.

"Yes, it was," said the prince.

"I hardly knew him; he is much changed, and for the better!"

"I am very glad," said the prince.

"He has been very ill," added Varia.

"How has he changed for the better?" asked Mrs. Epanchin. "I don't see
any change for the better! What's better in him? Where did you get THAT
idea from? WHAT'S better?"

"There's nothing better than the 'poor knight'!" said Colia, who was
standing near the last speaker's chair.

"I quite agree with you there!" said Prince S., laughing.

"So do I," said Adelaida, solemnly.

"WHAT poor knight?" asked Mrs. Epanchin, looking round at the face of
each of the speakers in turn. Seeing, however, that Aglaya was blushing,
she added, angrily:

"What nonsense you are all talking! What do you mean by poor knight?"

"It's not the first time this urchin, your favourite, has shown his
impudence by twisting other people's words," said Aglaya, haughtily.

Every time that Aglaya showed temper (and this was very often), there
was so much childish pouting, such "school-girlishness," as it were, in
her apparent wrath, that it was impossible to avoid smiling at her, to
her own unutterable indignation. On these occasions she would say, "How
can they, how DARE they laugh at me?"

This time everyone laughed at her, her sisters, Prince S., Prince
Muishkin (though he himself had flushed for some reason), and Colia.
Aglaya was dreadfully indignant, and looked twice as pretty in her
wrath.

"He's always twisting round what one says," she cried.

"I am only repeating your own exclamation!" said Colia. "A month ago you
were turning over the pages of your Don Quixote, and suddenly called out
'there is nothing better than the poor knight.' I don't know whom
you were referring to, of course, whether to Don Quixote, or Evgenie
Pavlovitch, or someone else, but you certainly said these words, and
afterwards there was a long conversation..."

"You are inclined to go a little too far, my good boy, with your
guesses," said Mrs. Epanchin, with some show of annoyance.

"But it's not I alone," cried Colia. "They all talked about it, and they
do still. Why, just now Prince S. and Adelaida Ivanovna declared that
they upheld 'the poor knight'; so evidently there does exist a 'poor
knight'; and if it were not for Adelaida Ivanovna, we should have known
long ago who the 'poor knight' was."

"Why, how am I to blame?" asked Adelaida, smiling.

"You wouldn't draw his portrait for us, that's why you are to blame!
Aglaya Ivanovna asked you to draw his portrait, and gave you the whole
subject of the picture. She invented it herself; and you wouldn't."

"What was I to draw? According to the lines she quoted:

"'From his face he never lifted That eternal mask of steel.'"

"What sort of a face was I to draw? I couldn't draw a mask."

"I don't know what you are driving at; what mask do you mean?" said
Mrs. Epanchin, irritably. She began to see pretty clearly though what
it meant, and whom they referred to by the generally accepted title of
"poor knight." But what specially annoyed her was that the prince was
looking so uncomfortable, and blushing like a ten-year-old child.

"Well, have you finished your silly joke?" she added, "and am I to be
told what this 'poor knight' means, or is it a solemn secret which
cannot be approached lightly?"

But they all laughed on.

"It's simply that there is a Russian poem," began Prince S., evidently
anxious to change the conversation, "a strange thing, without beginning
or end, and all about a 'poor knight.' A month or so ago, we were all
talking and laughing, and looking up a subject for one of Adelaida's
pictures--you know it is the principal business of this family to find
subjects for Adelaida's pictures. Well, we happened upon this 'poor
knight.' I don't remember who thought of it first--"

"Oh! Aglaya Ivanovna did," said Colia.

"Very likely--I don't recollect," continued Prince S.

"Some of us laughed at the subject; some liked it; but she declared
that, in order to make a picture of the gentleman, she must first see
his face. We then began to think over all our friends' faces to see
if any of them would do, and none suited us, and so the matter stood;
that's all. I don't know why Nicolai Ardalionovitch has brought up
the joke now. What was appropriate and funny then, has quite lost all
interest by this time."

"Probably there's some new silliness about it," said Mrs. Epanchin,
sarcastically.

"There is no silliness about it at all--only the profoundest respect,"
said Aglaya, very seriously. She had quite recovered her temper; in
fact, from certain signs, it was fair to conclude that she was delighted
to see this joke going so far; and a careful observer might have
remarked that her satisfaction dated from the moment when the fact of
the prince's confusion became apparent to all.

"'Profoundest respect!' What nonsense! First, insane giggling, and then,
all of a sudden, a display of 'profoundest respect.' Why respect? Tell
me at once, why have you suddenly developed this 'profound respect,'
eh?"

"Because," replied Aglaya gravely, "in the poem the knight is described
as a man capable of living up to an ideal all his life. That sort of
thing is not to be found every day among the men of our times. In the
poem it is not stated exactly what the ideal was, but it was evidently
some vision, some revelation of pure Beauty, and the knight wore round
his neck, instead of a scarf, a rosary. A device--A. N. B.--the meaning
of which is not explained, was inscribed on his shield--"

"No, A. N. D.," corrected Colia.

"I say A. N. B., and so it shall be!" cried Aglaya, irritably. "Anyway,
the 'poor knight' did not care what his lady was, or what she did. He
had chosen his ideal, and he was bound to serve her, and break lances
for her, and acknowledge her as the ideal of pure Beauty, whatever she
might say or do afterwards. If she had taken to stealing, he would have
championed her just the same. I think the poet desired to embody in this
one picture the whole spirit of medieval chivalry and the platonic love
of a pure and high-souled knight. Of course it's all an ideal, and in
the 'poor knight' that spirit reached the utmost limit of asceticism. He
is a Don Quixote, only serious and not comical. I used not to understand
him, and laughed at him, but now I love the 'poor knight,' and respect
his actions."

So ended Aglaya; and, to look at her, it was difficult, indeed, to judge
whether she was joking or in earnest.

"Pooh! he was a fool, and his actions were the actions of a fool," said
Mrs. Epanchin; "and as for you, young woman, you ought to know better.
At all events, you are not to talk like that again. What poem is it?
Recite it! I want to hear this poem! I have hated poetry all my life.
Prince, you must excuse this nonsense. We neither of us like this sort
of thing! Be patient!"

They certainly were put out, both of them.

The prince tried to say something, but he was too confused, and could
not get his words out. Aglaya, who had taken such liberties in her
little speech, was the only person present, perhaps, who was not in the
least embarrassed. She seemed, in fact, quite pleased.

She now rose solemnly from her seat, walked to the centre of the
terrace, and stood in front of the prince's chair. All looked on with
some surprise, and Prince S. and her sisters with feelings of decided
alarm, to see what new frolic she was up to; it had gone quite far
enough already, they thought. But Aglaya evidently thoroughly enjoyed
the affectation and ceremony with which she was introducing her
recitation of the poem.

Mrs. Epanchin was just wondering whether she would not forbid the
performance after all, when, at the very moment that Aglaya commenced
her declamation, two new guests, both talking loudly, entered from the
street. The new arrivals were General Epanchin and a young man.

Their entrance caused some slight commotion.

VII.

THE young fellow accompanying the general was about twenty-eight, tall,
and well built, with a handsome and clever face, and bright black eyes,
full of fun and intelligence.

Aglaya did not so much as glance at the new arrivals, but went on with
her recitation, gazing at the prince the while in an affected manner,
and at him alone. It was clear to him that she was doing all this with
some special object.

But the new guests at least somewhat eased his strained and
uncomfortable position. Seeing them approaching, he rose from his chair,
and nodding amicably to the general, signed to him not to interrupt the
recitation. He then got behind his chair, and stood there with his left
hand resting on the back of it. Thanks to this change of position,
he was able to listen to the ballad with far less embarrassment than
before. Mrs. Epanchin had also twice motioned to the new arrivals to be
quiet, and stay where they were.

The prince was much interested in the young man who had just entered. He
easily concluded that this was Evgenie Pavlovitch Radomski, of whom he
had already heard mention several times. He was puzzled, however, by the
young man's plain clothes, for he had always heard of Evgenie Pavlovitch
as a military man. An ironical smile played on Evgenie's lips all the
while the recitation was proceeding, which showed that he, too, was
probably in the secret of the 'poor knight' joke. But it had become
quite a different matter with Aglaya. All the affectation of manner
which she had displayed at the beginning disappeared as the ballad
proceeded. She spoke the lines in so serious and exalted a manner, and
with so much taste, that she even seemed to justify the exaggerated
solemnity with which she had stepped forward. It was impossible to
discern in her now anything but a deep feeling for the spirit of the
poem which she had undertaken to interpret.

Her eyes were aglow with inspiration, and a slight tremor of rapture
passed over her lovely features once or twice. She continued to recite:

"Once there came a vision glorious, Mystic, dreadful, wondrous fair;
Burned itself into his spirit, And abode for ever there!

"Never more--from that sweet moment--Gazed he on womankind; He was dumb
to love and wooing And to all their graces blind.

"Full of love for that sweet vision, Brave and pure he took the field;
With his blood he stained the letters N. P. B. upon his shield.

"'Lumen caeli, sancta Rosa!' Shouting on the foe he fell, And like
thunder rang his war-cry O'er the cowering infidel.

"Then within his distant castle, Home returned, he dreamed his
days-Silent, sad,--and when death took him He was mad, the legend says."

When recalling all this afterwards the prince could not for the life of
him understand how to reconcile the beautiful, sincere, pure nature of
the girl with the irony of this jest. That it was a jest there was no
doubt whatever; he knew that well enough, and had good reason, too,
for his conviction; for during her recitation of the ballad Aglaya had
deliberately changed the letters A. N. B. into N. P. B. He was quite
sure she had not done this by accident, and that his ears had not
deceived him. At all events her performance--which was a joke, of
course, if rather a crude one,--was premeditated. They had evidently
talked (and laughed) over the 'poor knight' for more than a month.

Yet Aglaya had brought out these letters N. P. B. not only without the
slightest appearance of irony, or even any particular accentuation, but
with so even and unbroken an appearance of seriousness that assuredly
anyone might have supposed that these initials were the original ones
written in the ballad. The thing made an uncomfortable impression upon
the prince. Of course Mrs. Epanchin saw nothing either in the change of
initials or in the insinuation embodied therein. General Epanchin only
knew that there was a recitation of verses going on, and took no further
interest in the matter. Of the rest of the audience, many had understood
the allusion and wondered both at the daring of the lady and at the
motive underlying it, but tried to show no sign of their feelings. But
Evgenie Pavlovitch (as the prince was ready to wager) both comprehended
and tried his best to show that he comprehended; his smile was too
mocking to leave any doubt on that point.

"How beautiful that is!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, with sincere admiration.
"Whose is it?"

"Pushkin's, mama, of course! Don't disgrace us all by showing your
ignorance," said Adelaida.

"As soon as we reach home give it to me to read."

"I don't think we have a copy of Pushkin in the house."

"There are a couple of torn volumes somewhere; they have been lying
about from time immemorial," added Alexandra.

"Send Feodor or Alexey up by the very first train to buy a copy,
then.--Aglaya, come here--kiss me, dear, you recited beautifully! but,"
she added in a whisper, "if you were sincere I am sorry for you. If it
was a joke, I do not approve of the feelings which prompted you to do
it, and in any case you would have done far better not to recite it at
all. Do you understand?--Now come along, young woman; we've sat here too
long. I'll speak to you about this another time."

Meanwhile the prince took the opportunity of greeting General Epanchin,
and the general introduced Evgenie Pavlovitch to him.

"I caught him up on the way to your house," explained the general. "He
had heard that we were all here."

"Yes, and I heard that you were here, too," added Evgenie Pavlovitch;
"and since I had long promised myself the pleasure of seeking not only
your acquaintance but your friendship, I did not wish to waste time, but
came straight on. I am sorry to hear that you are unwell."

"Oh, but I'm quite well now, thank you, and very glad to make your
acquaintance. Prince S. has often spoken to me about you," said
Muishkin, and for an instant the two men looked intently into one
another's eyes.

The prince remarked that Evgenie Pavlovitch's plain clothes had
evidently made a great impression upon the company present, so much so
that all other interests seemed to be effaced before this surprising
fact.

His change of dress was evidently a matter of some importance. Adelaida
and Alexandra poured out a stream of questions; Prince S., a relative
of the young man, appeared annoyed; and Ivan Fedorovitch quite excited.
Aglaya alone was not interested. She merely looked closely at Evgenie
for a minute, curious perhaps as to whether civil or military clothes
became him best, then turned away and paid no more attention to him or
his costume. Lizabetha Prokofievna asked no questions, but it was clear
that she was uneasy, and the prince fancied that Evgenie was not in her
good graces.

"He has astonished me," said Ivan Fedorovitch. "I nearly fell down with
surprise. I could hardly believe my eyes when I met him in Petersburg
just now. Why this haste? That's what I want to know. He has always said
himself that there is no need to break windows."

Evgenie Pavlovitch remarked here that he had spoken of his intention of
leaving the service long ago. He had, however, always made more or less
of a joke about it, so no one had taken him seriously. For that matter
he joked about everything, and his friends never knew what to believe,
especially if he did not wish them to understand him.

"I have only retired for a time," said he, laughing. "For a few months;
at most for a year."

"But there is no necessity for you to retire at all," complained the
general, "as far as I know."

"I want to go and look after my country estates. You advised me to do
that yourself," was the reply. "And then I wish to go abroad."

After a few more expostulations, the conversation drifted into other
channels, but the prince, who had been an attentive listener, thought
all this excitement about so small a matter very curious. "There must be
more in it than appears," he said to himself.

"I see the 'poor knight' has come on the scene again," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, stepping to Aglaya's side.

To the amazement of the prince, who overheard the remark, Aglaya looked
haughtily and inquiringly at the questioner, as though she would give
him to know, once for all, that there could be no talk between them
about the 'poor knight,' and that she did not understand his question.

"But not now! It is too late to send to town for a Pushkin now. It is
much too late, I say!" Colia was exclaiming in a loud voice. "I have
told you so at least a hundred times."

"Yes, it is really much too late to send to town now," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, who had escaped from Aglaya as rapidly as possible. "I am
sure the shops are shut in Petersburg; it is past eight o'clock," he
added, looking at his watch.

"We have done without him so far," interrupted Adelaida in her turn.
"Surely we can wait until to-morrow."

"Besides," said Colia, "it is quite unusual, almost improper, for
people in our position to take any interest in literature. Ask Evgenie
Pavlovitch if I am not right. It is much more fashionable to drive a
waggonette with red wheels."

"You got that from some magazine, Colia," remarked Adelaida.

"He gets most of his conversation in that way," laughed Evgenie
Pavlovitch. "He borrows whole phrases from the reviews. I have long
had the pleasure of knowing both Nicholai Ardalionovitch and his
conversational methods, but this time he was not repeating something he
had read; he was alluding, no doubt, to my yellow waggonette, which has,
or had, red wheels. But I have exchanged it, so you are rather behind
the times, Colia."

The prince had been listening attentively to Radomski's words, and
thought his manner very pleasant. When Colia chaffed him about his
waggonette he had replied with perfect equality and in a friendly
fashion. This pleased Muishkin.

At this moment Vera came up to Lizabetha Prokofievna, carrying several
large and beautifully bound books, apparently quite new.

"What is it?" demanded the lady.

"This is Pushkin," replied the girl. "Papa told me to offer it to you."

"What? Impossible!" exclaimed Mrs. Epanchin.

"Not as a present, not as a present! I should not have taken the
liberty," said Lebedeff, appearing suddenly from behind his daughter.
"It is our own Pushkin, our family copy, Annenkoff's edition; it could
not be bought now. I beg to suggest, with great respect, that your
excellency should buy it, and thus quench the noble literary thirst
which is consuming you at this moment," he concluded grandiloquently.

"Oh! if you will sell it, very good--and thank you. You shall not be a
loser! But for goodness' sake, don't twist about like that, sir! I have
heard of you; they tell me you are a very learned person. We must have a
talk one of these days. You will bring me the books yourself?"

"With the greatest respect... and... and veneration," replied Lebedeff,
making extraordinary grimaces.

"Well, bring them, with or without respect, provided always you do not
drop them on the way; but on the condition," went on the lady, looking
full at him, "that you do not cross my threshold. I do not intend to
receive you today. You may send your daughter Vera at once, if you like.
I am much pleased with her."

"Why don't you tell him about them?" said Vera impatiently to her
father. "They will come in, whether you announce them or not, and they
are beginning to make a row. Lef Nicolaievitch,"--she addressed herself
to the prince--"four men are here asking for you. They have waited some
time, and are beginning to make a fuss, and papa will not bring them
in."

"Who are these people?" said the prince.

"They say that they have come on business, and they are the kind of men,
who, if you do not see them here, will follow you about the street.
It would be better to receive them, and then you will get rid of them.
Gavrila Ardalionovitch and Ptitsin are both there, trying to make them
hear reason."

"Pavlicheff's son! It is not worth while!" cried Lebedeff. "There is
no necessity to see them, and it would be most unpleasant for your
excellency. They do not deserve..."

"What? Pavlicheff's son!" cried the prince, much perturbed. "I know...
I know--but I entrusted this matter to Gavrila Ardalionovitch. He told
me..."

At that moment Gania, accompanied by Ptitsin, came out to the terrace.
From an adjoining room came a noise of angry voices, and General
Ivolgin, in loud tones, seemed to be trying to shout them down. Colia
rushed off at once to investigate the cause of the uproar.

"This is most interesting!" observed Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"I expect he knows all about it!" thought the prince.

"What, the son of Pavlicheff? And who may this son of Pavlicheff be?"
asked General Epanchin with surprise; and looking curiously around him,
he discovered that he alone had no clue to the mystery. Expectation and
suspense were on every face, with the exception of that of the prince,
who stood gravely wondering how an affair so entirely personal could
have awakened such lively and widespread interest in so short a time.

Aglaya went up to him with a peculiarly serious look

"It will be well," she said, "if you put an end to this affair yourself
AT ONCE: but you must allow us to be your witnesses. They want to throw
mud at you, prince, and you must be triumphantly vindicated. I give you
joy beforehand!"

"And I also wish for justice to be done, once for all," cried Madame
Epanchin, "about this impudent claim. Deal with them promptly, prince,
and don't spare them! I am sick of hearing about the affair, and many a
quarrel I have had in your cause. But I confess I am anxious to see what
happens, so do make them come out here, and we will remain. You have
heard people talking about it, no doubt?" she added, turning to Prince
S.

"Of course," said he. "I have heard it spoken about at your house, and I
am anxious to see these young men!"

"They are Nihilists, are they not?"

"No, they are not Nihilists," explained Lebedeff, who seemed much
excited. "This is another lot--a special group. According to my nephew
they are more advanced even than the Nihilists. You are quite wrong,
excellency, if you think that your presence will intimidate them;
nothing intimidates them. Educated men, learned men even, are to be
found among Nihilists; these go further, in that they are men of action.
The movement is, properly speaking, a derivative from Nihilism--though
they are only known indirectly, and by hearsay, for they never advertise
their doings in the papers. They go straight to the point. For them, it
is not a question of showing that Pushkin is stupid, or that Russia must
be torn in pieces. No; but if they have a great desire for anything,
they believe they have a right to get it even at the cost of the lives,
say, of eight persons. They are checked by no obstacles. In fact,
prince, I should not advise you..."

But Muishkin had risen, and was on his way to open the door for his
visitors.

"You are slandering them, Lebedeff," said he, smiling.

"You are always thinking about your nephew's conduct. Don't believe
him, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I can assure you Gorsky and Daniloff are
exceptions--and that these are only... mistaken. However, I do not care
about receiving them here, in public. Excuse me, Lizabetha Prokofievna.
They are coming, and you can see them, and then I will take them away.
Please come in, gentlemen!"

Another thought tormented him: He wondered was this an arranged
business--arranged to happen when he had guests in his house, and in
anticipation of his humiliation rather than of his triumph? But he
reproached himself bitterly for such a thought, and felt as if he should
die of shame if it were discovered. When his new visitors appeared, he
was quite ready to believe himself infinitely less to be respected than
any of them.

Four persons entered, led by General Ivolgin, in a state of great
excitement, and talking eloquently.

"He is for me, undoubtedly!" thought the prince, with a smile. Colia
also had joined the party, and was talking with animation to Hippolyte,
who listened with a jeering smile on his lips.

The prince begged the visitors to sit down. They were all so young that
it made the proceedings seem even more extraordinary. Ivan Fedorovitch,
who really understood nothing of what was going on, felt indignant at
the sight of these youths, and would have interfered in some way had it
not been for the extreme interest shown by his wife in the affair.
He therefore remained, partly through curiosity, partly through
good-nature, hoping that his presence might be of some use. But the bow
with which General Ivolgin greeted him irritated him anew; he frowned,
and decided to be absolutely silent.

As to the rest, one was a man of thirty, the retired officer, now a
boxer, who had been with Rogojin, and in his happier days had given
fifteen roubles at a time to beggars. Evidently he had joined the others
as a comrade to give them moral, and if necessary material, support. The
man who had been spoken of as "Pavlicheff's son," although he gave the
name of Antip Burdovsky, was about twenty-two years of age, fair,
thin and rather tall. He was remarkable for the poverty, not to say
uncleanliness, of his personal appearance: the sleeves of his overcoat
were greasy; his dirty waistcoat, buttoned up to his neck, showed not a
trace of linen; a filthy black silk scarf, twisted till it resembled a
cord, was round his neck, and his hands were unwashed. He looked round
with an air of insolent effrontery. His face, covered with pimples,
was neither thoughtful nor even contemptuous; it wore an expression
of complacent satisfaction in demanding his rights and in being an
aggrieved party. His voice trembled, and he spoke so fast, and with such
stammerings, that he might have been taken for a foreigner, though
the purest Russian blood ran in his veins. Lebedeff's nephew, whom
the reader has seen already, accompanied him, and also the youth named
Hippolyte Terentieff. The latter was only seventeen or eighteen. He
had an intelligent face, though it was usually irritated and fretful
in expression. His skeleton-like figure, his ghastly complexion, the
brightness of his eyes, and the red spots of colour on his cheeks,
betrayed the victim of consumption to the most casual glance. He coughed
persistently, and panted for breath; it looked as though he had but
a few weeks more to live. He was nearly dead with fatigue, and fell,
rather than sat, into a chair. The rest bowed as they came in; and being
more or less abashed, put on an air of extreme self-assurance. In short,
their attitude was not that which one would have expected in men who
professed to despise all trivialities, all foolish mundane conventions,
and indeed everything, except their own personal interests.

"Antip Burdovsky," stuttered the son of Pavlicheff.

"Vladimir Doktorenko," said Lebedeff's nephew briskly, and with a
certain pride, as if he boasted of his name.

"Keller," murmured the retired officer.

"Hippolyte Terentieff," cried the last-named, in a shrill voice.

They sat now in a row facing the prince, and frowned, and played with
their caps. All appeared ready to speak, and yet all were silent; the
defiant expression on their faces seemed to say, "No, sir, you don't
take us in!" It could be felt that the first word spoken by anyone
present would bring a torrent of speech from the whole deputation.

VIII.

"I _did_ not expect you, gentlemen," began the prince. "I have been ill
until to-day. A month ago," he continued, addressing himself to Antip
Burdovsky, "I put your business into Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin's
hands, as I told you then. I do not in the least object to having a
personal interview... but you will agree with me that this is hardly the
time... I propose that we go into another room, if you will not keep me
long... As you see, I have friends here, and believe me..."

"Friends as many as you please, but allow me," interrupted the harsh
voice of Lebedeff's nephew--"allow me to tell you that you might have
treated us rather more politely, and not have kept us waiting at least
two hours...

"No doubt... and I... is that acting like a prince? And you... you may
be a general! But I... I am not your valet! And I... I..." stammered
Antip Burdovsky.

He was extremely excited; his lips trembled, and the resentment of an
embittered soul was in his voice. But he spoke so indistinctly that
hardly a dozen words could be gathered.

"It was a princely action!" sneered Hippolyte.

"If anyone had treated me so," grumbled the boxer.

"I mean to say that if I had been in Burdovsky's place...I..."

"Gentlemen, I did not know you were there; I have only just been
informed, I assure you," repeated Muishkin.

"We are not afraid of your friends, prince," remarked Lebedeff's nephew,
"for we are within our rights."

The shrill tones of Hippolyte interrupted him. "What right have you...
by what right do you demand us to submit this matter, about Burdovsky...
to the judgment of your friends? We know only too well what the judgment
of your friends will be!..."

This beginning gave promise of a stormy discussion. The prince was
much discouraged, but at last he managed to make himself heard amid the
vociferations of his excited visitors.

"If you," he said, addressing Burdovsky--"if you prefer not to speak
here, I offer again to go into another room with you... and as to your
waiting to see me, I repeat that I only this instant heard..."

"Well, you have no right, you have no right, no right at all!... Your
friends indeed!"... gabbled Burdovsky, defiantly examining the faces
round him, and becoming more and more excited. "You have no right!..."
As he ended thus abruptly, he leant forward, staring at the prince with
his short-sighted, bloodshot eyes. The latter was so astonished, that he
did not reply, but looked steadily at him in return.

"Lef Nicolaievitch!" interposed Madame Epanchin, suddenly, "read this at
once, this very moment! It is about this business."

She held out a weekly comic paper, pointing to an article on one of
its pages. Just as the visitors were coming in, Lebedeff, wishing to
ingratiate himself with the great lady, had pulled this paper from his
pocket, and presented it to her, indicating a few columns marked in
pencil. Lizabetha Prokofievna had had time to read some of it, and was
greatly upset.

"Would it not be better to peruse it alone..." later asked the prince,
nervously.

"No, no, read it--read it at once directly, and aloud, aloud!" cried
she, calling Colia to her and giving him the journal.--"Read it aloud,
so that everyone may hear it!"

An impetuous woman, Lizabetha Prokofievna sometimes weighed her anchors
and put out to sea quite regardless of the possible storms she might
encounter. Ivan Fedorovitch felt a sudden pang of alarm, but the others
were merely curious, and somewhat surprised. Colia unfolded the paper,
and began to read, in his clear, high-pitched voice, the following
article:

"Proletarians and scions of nobility! An episode of the brigandage of
today and every day! Progress! Reform! Justice!"

"Strange things are going on in our so-called Holy Russia in this age of
reform and great enterprises; this age of patriotism in which hundreds
of millions are yearly sent abroad; in which industry is encouraged, and
the hands of Labour paralyzed, etc.; there is no end to this, gentlemen,
so let us come to the point. A strange thing has happened to a scion
of our defunct aristocracy. (DE PROFUNDIS!) The grandfathers of these
scions ruined themselves at the gaming-tables; their fathers were forced
to serve as officers or subalterns; some have died just as they were
about to be tried for innocent thoughtlessness in the handling of public
funds. Their children are sometimes congenital idiots, like the hero of
our story; sometimes they are found in the dock at the Assizes, where
they are generally acquitted by the jury for edifying motives; sometimes
they distinguish themselves by one of those burning scandals that amaze
the public and add another blot to the stained record of our age. Six
months ago--that is, last winter--this particular scion returned to
Russia, wearing gaiters like a foreigner, and shivering with cold in
an old scantily-lined cloak. He had come from Switzerland, where he
had just undergone a successful course of treatment for idiocy (SIC!).
Certainly Fortune favoured him, for, apart from the interesting malady
of which he was cured in Switzerland (can there be a cure for idiocy?)
his story proves the truth of the Russian proverb that 'happiness is
the right of certain classes!' Judge for yourselves. Our subject was an
infant in arms when he lost his father, an officer who died just as
he was about to be court-martialled for gambling away the funds of his
company, and perhaps also for flogging a subordinate to excess (remember
the good old days, gentlemen). The orphan was brought up by the charity
of a very rich Russian landowner. In the good old days, this man,
whom we will call P--, owned four thousand souls as serfs (souls as
serfs!--can you understand such an expression, gentlemen? I cannot; it
must be looked up in a dictionary before one can understand it; these
things of a bygone day are already unintelligible to us). He appears
to have been one of those Russian parasites who lead an idle existence
abroad, spending the summer at some spa, and the winter in Paris, to the
greater profit of the organizers of public balls. It may safely be said
that the manager of the Chateau des Fleurs (lucky man!) pocketed at
least a third of the money paid by Russian peasants to their lords in
the days of serfdom. However this may be, the gay P--brought up the
orphan like a prince, provided him with tutors and governesses (pretty,
of course!) whom he chose himself in Paris. But the little aristocrat,
the last of his noble race, was an idiot. The governesses, recruited at
the Chateau des Fleurs, laboured in vain; at twenty years of age their
pupil could not speak in any language, not even Russian. But ignorance
of the latter was still excusable. At last P---- was seized with a
strange notion; he imagined that in Switzerland they could change an
idiot into a mail of sense. After all, the idea was quite logical;
a parasite and landowner naturally supposed that intelligence was a
marketable commodity like everything else, and that in Switzerland
especially it could be bought for money. The case was entrusted to a
celebrated Swiss professor, and cost thousands of roubles; the
treatment lasted five years. Needless to say, the idiot did not become
intelligent, but it is alleged that he grew into something more or less
resembling a man. At this stage P---- died suddenly, and, as usual,
he had made no will and left his affairs in disorder. A crowd of eager
claimants arose, who cared nothing about any last scion of a noble race
undergoing treatment in Switzerland, at the expense of the deceased, as
a congenital idiot. Idiot though he was, the noble scion tried to cheat
his professor, and they say he succeeded in getting him to continue
the treatment gratis for two years, by concealing the death of his
benefactor. But the professor himself was a charlatan. Getting anxious
at last when no money was forthcoming, and alarmed above all by his
patient's appetite, he presented him with a pair of old gaiters and a
shabby cloak and packed him off to Russia, third class. It would seem
that Fortune had turned her back upon our hero. Not at all; Fortune,
who lets whole populations die of hunger, showered all her gifts at once
upon the little aristocrat, like Kryloff's Cloud which passes over an
arid plain and empties itself into the sea. He had scarcely arrived in
St. Petersburg, when a relation of his mother's (who was of bourgeois
origin, of course), died at Moscow. He was a merchant, an Old Believer,
and he had no children. He left a fortune of several millions in good
current coin, and everything came to our noble scion, our gaitered
baron, formerly treated for idiocy in a Swiss lunatic asylum. Instantly
the scene changed, crowds of friends gathered round our baron, who
meanwhile had lost his head over a celebrated demi-mondaine; he even
discovered some relations; moreover a number of young girls of high
birth burned to be united to him in lawful matrimony. Could anyone
possibly imagine a better match? Aristocrat, millionaire, and idiot, he
has every advantage! One might hunt in vain for his equal, even with the
lantern of Diogenes; his like is not to be had even by getting it made
to order!"

"Oh, I don't know what this means" cried Ivan Fedorovitch, transported
with indignation.

"Leave off, Colia," begged the prince. Exclamations arose on all sides.

"Let him go on reading at all costs!" ordered Lizabetha Prokofievna,
evidently preserving her composure by a desperate effort. "Prince, if
the reading is stopped, you and I will quarrel."

Colia had no choice but to obey. With crimson cheeks he read on
unsteadily:

"But while our young millionaire dwelt as it were in the Empyrean,
something new occurred. One fine morning a man called upon him, calm and
severe of aspect, distinguished, but plainly dressed. Politely, but in
dignified terms, as befitted his errand, he briefly explained the motive
for his visit. He was a lawyer of enlightened views; his client was a
young man who had consulted him in confidence. This young man was no
other than the son of P--, though he bears another name. In his youth
P--, the sensualist, had seduced a young girl, poor but respectable. She
was a serf, but had received a European education. Finding that a child
was expected, he hastened her marriage with a man of noble character who
had loved her for a long time. He helped the young couple for a time,
but he was soon obliged to give up, for the high-minded husband refused
to accept anything from him. Soon the careless nobleman forgot all about
his former mistress and the child she had borne him; then, as we know,
he died intestate. P--'s son, born after his mother's marriage, found
a true father in the generous man whose name he bore. But when he also
died, the orphan was left to provide for himself, his mother now being
an invalid who had lost the use of her limbs. Leaving her in a distant
province, he came to the capital in search of pupils. By dint of daily
toil he earned enough to enable him to follow the college courses, and
at last to enter the university. But what can one earn by teaching the
children of Russian merchants at ten copecks a lesson, especially with
an invalid mother to keep? Even her death did not much diminish the
hardships of the young man's struggle for existence. Now this is the
question: how, in the name of justice, should our scion have argued the
case? Our readers will think, no doubt, that he would say to himself:
'P--showered benefits upon me all my life; he spent tens of thousands
of roubles to educate me, to provide me with governesses, and to keep me
under treatment in Switzerland. Now I am a millionaire, and P----'s son,
a noble young man who is not responsible for the faults of his careless
and forgetful father, is wearing himself out giving ill-paid lessons.
According to justice, all that was done for me ought to have been done
for him. The enormous sums spent upon me were not really mine; they
came to me by an error of blind Fortune, when they ought to have gone to
P----'s son. They should have gone to benefit him, not me, in whom P----
interested himself by a mere caprice, instead of doing his duty as a
father. If I wished to behave nobly, justly, and with delicacy, I ought
to bestow half my fortune upon the son of my benefactor; but as economy
is my favourite virtue, and I know this is not a case in which the law
can intervene, I will not give up half my millions. But it would be too
openly vile, too flagrantly infamous, if I did not at least restore to
P----'s son the tens of thousands of roubles spent in curing my idiocy.
This is simply a case of conscience and of strict justice. Whatever
would have become of me if P---- had not looked after my education, and
had taken care of his own son instead of me?'

"No, gentlemen, our scions of the nobility do not reason thus. The
lawyer, who had taken up the matter purely out of friendship to the
young man, and almost against his will, invoked every consideration
of justice, delicacy, honour, and even plain figures; in vain, the
ex-patient of the Swiss lunatic asylum was inflexible. All this might
pass, but the sequel is absolutely unpardonable, and not to be excused
by any interesting malady. This millionaire, having but just discarded
the old gaiters of his professor, could not even understand that
the noble young man slaving away at his lessons was not asking for
charitable help, but for his rightful due, though the debt was not a
legal one; that, correctly speaking, he was not asking for anything, but
it was merely his friends who had thought fit to bestir themselves on
his behalf. With the cool insolence of a bloated capitalist, secure in
his millions, he majestically drew a banknote for fifty roubles from his
pocket-book and sent it to the noble young man as a humiliating piece of
charity. You can hardly believe it, gentlemen! You are scandalized and
disgusted; you cry out in indignation! But that is what he did! Needless
to say, the money was returned, or rather flung back in his face. The
case is not within the province of the law, it must be referred to the
tribunal of public opinion; this is what we now do, guaranteeing the
truth of all the details which we have related."

When Colia had finished reading, he handed the paper to the prince, and
retired silently to a corner of the room, hiding his face in his
hands. He was overcome by a feeling of inexpressible shame; his boyish
sensitiveness was wounded beyond endurance. It seemed to him that
something extraordinary, some sudden catastrophe had occurred, and that
he was almost the cause of it, because he had read the article aloud.

Yet all the others were similarly affected. The girls were uncomfortable
and ashamed. Lizabetha Prokofievna restrained her violent anger by a
great effort; perhaps she bitterly regretted her interference in the
matter; for the present she kept silence. The prince felt as very shy
people often do in such a case; he was so ashamed of the conduct of
other people, so humiliated for his guests, that he dared not look them
in the face. Ptitsin, Varia, Gania, and Lebedeff himself, all looked
rather confused. Stranger still, Hippolyte and the "son of Pavlicheff"
also seemed slightly surprised, and Lebedeff's nephew was obviously
far from pleased. The boxer alone was perfectly calm; he twisted his
moustaches with affected dignity, and if his eyes were cast down it was
certainly not in confusion, but rather in noble modesty, as if he did
not wish to be insolent in his triumph. It was evident that he was
delighted with the article.

"The devil knows what it means," growled Ivan Fedorovitch, under his
breath; "it must have taken the united wits of fifty footmen to write
it."

"May I ask your reason for such an insulting supposition, sir?" said
Hippolyte, trembling with rage.

"You will admit yourself, general, that for an honourable man, if the
author is an honourable man, that is an--an insult," growled the boxer
suddenly, with convulsive jerkings of his shoulders.

"In the first place, it is not for you to address me as 'sir,' and,
in the second place, I refuse to give you any explanation," said Ivan
Fedorovitch vehemently; and he rose without another word, and went and
stood on the first step of the flight that led from the verandah to the
street, turning his back on the company. He was indignant with Lizabetha
Prokofievna, who did not think of moving even now.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen, let me speak at last," cried the prince, anxious
and agitated. "Please let us understand one another. I say nothing about
the article, gentlemen, except that every word is false; I say this
because you know it as well as I do. It is shameful. I should be
surprised if any one of you could have written it."

"I did not know of its existence till this moment," declared Hippolyte.
"I do not approve of it."

"I knew it had been written, but I would not have advised its
publication," said Lebedeff's nephew, "because it is premature."

"I knew it, but I have a right. I... I..." stammered the "son of
Pavlicheff."

"What! Did you write all that yourself? Is it possible?" asked the
prince, regarding Burdovsky with curiosity.

"One might dispute your right to ask such questions," observed
Lebedeff's nephew.

"I was only surprised that Mr. Burdovsky should have--however, this is
what I have to say. Since you had already given the matter publicity,
why did you object just now, when I began to speak of it to my friends?"

"At last!" murmured Lizabetha Prokofievna indignantly.

Lebedeff could restrain himself no longer; he made his way through the
row of chairs.

"Prince," he cried, "you are forgetting that if you consented to receive
and hear them, it was only because of your kind heart which has no
equal, for they had not the least right to demand it, especially as you
had placed the matter in the hands of Gavrila Ardalionovitch, which
was also extremely kind of you. You are also forgetting, most excellent
prince, that you are with friends, a select company; you cannot
sacrifice them to these gentlemen, and it is only for you to have them
turned out this instant. As the master of the house I shall have great
pleasure ...."

"Quite right!" agreed General Ivolgin in a loud voice.

"That will do, Lebedeff, that will do--" began the prince, when an
indignant outcry drowned his words.

"Excuse me, prince, excuse me, but now that will not do," shouted
Lebedeff's nephew, his voice dominating all the others. "The matter must
be clearly stated, for it is obviously not properly understood. They
are calling in some legal chicanery, and upon that ground they are
threatening to turn us out of the house! Really, prince, do you think we
are such fools as not to be aware that this matter does not come within
the law, and that legally we cannot claim a rouble from you? But we are
also aware that if actual law is not on our side, human law is for us,
natural law, the law of common-sense and conscience, which is no less
binding upon every noble and honest man--that is, every man of sane
judgment--because it is not to be found in miserable legal codes. If we
come here without fear of being turned out (as was threatened just now)
because of the imperative tone of our demand, and the unseemliness of
such a visit at this late hour (though it was not late when we arrived,
we were kept waiting in your anteroom), if, I say, we came in without
fear, it is just because we expected to find you a man of sense; I mean,
a man of honour and conscience. It is quite true that we did not present
ourselves humbly, like your flatterers and parasites, but holding up our
heads as befits independent men. We present no petition, but a proud and
free demand (note it well, we do not beseech, we demand!). We ask you
fairly and squarely in a dignified manner. Do you believe that in this
affair of Burdovsky you have right on your side? Do you admit that
Pavlicheff overwhelmed you with benefits, and perhaps saved your life?
If you admit it (which we take for granted), do you intend, now that you
are a millionaire, and do you not think it in conformity with justice,
to indemnify Burdovsky? Yes or no? If it is yes, or, in other words, if
you possess what you call honour and conscience, and we more justly call
common-sense, then accede to our demand, and the matter is at an end.
Give us satisfaction, without entreaties or thanks from us; do not
expect thanks from us, for what you do will be done not for our sake,
but for the sake of justice. If you refuse to satisfy us, that is, if
your answer is no, we will go away at once, and there will be an end of
the matter. But we will tell you to your face before the present company
that you are a man of vulgar and undeveloped mind; we will openly deny
you the right to speak in future of your honour and conscience, for you
have not paid the fair price of such a right. I have no more to say--I
have put the question before you. Now turn us out if you dare. You can
do it; force is on your side. But remember that we do not beseech, we
demand! We do not beseech, we demand!"

With these last excited words, Lebedeff's nephew was silent.

"We demand, we demand, we demand, we do not beseech," spluttered
Burdovsky, red as a lobster.

The speech of Lebedeff's nephew caused a certain stir among the company;
murmurs arose, though with the exception of Lebedeff, who was still
very much excited, everyone was careful not to interfere in the matter.
Strangely enough, Lebedeff, although on the prince's side, seemed quite
proud of his nephew's eloquence. Gratified vanity was visible in the
glances he cast upon the assembled company.

"In my opinion, Mr. Doktorenko," said the prince, in rather a low
voice, "you are quite right in at least half of what you say. I would
go further and say that you are altogether right, and that I quite agree
with you, if there were not something lacking in your speech. I cannot
undertake to say precisely what it is, but you have certainly omitted
something, and you cannot be quite just while there is something
lacking. But let us put that aside and return to the point. Tell me what
induced you to publish this article. Every word of it is a calumny, and
I think, gentlemen, that you have been guilty of a mean action."

"Allow me--"

"Sir--"

"What? What? What?" cried all the visitors at once, in violent
agitation.

"As to the article," said Hippolyte in his croaking voice, "I have told
you already that we none of us approve of it! There is the writer," he
added, pointing to the boxer, who sat beside him. "I quite admit that he
has written it in his old regimental manner, with an equal disregard
for style and decency. I know he is a cross between a fool and an
adventurer; I make no bones about telling him so to his face every day.
But after all he is half justified; publicity is the lawful right of
every man; consequently, Burdovsky is not excepted. Let him answer for
his own blunders. As to the objection which I made just now in the name
of all, to the presence of your friends, I think I ought to explain,
gentlemen, that I only did so to assert our rights, though we really
wished to have witnesses; we had agreed unanimously upon the point
before we came in. We do not care who your witnesses may be, or
whether they are your friends or not. As they cannot fail to recognize
Burdovsky's right (seeing that it is mathematically demonstrable), it is
just as well that the witnesses should be your friends. The truth will
only be more plainly evident."

"It is quite true; we had agreed upon that point," said Lebedeff's
nephew, in confirmation.

"If that is the case, why did you begin by making such a fuss about it?"
asked the astonished prince.

The boxer was dying to get in a few words; owing, no doubt, to the
presence of the ladies, he was becoming quite jovial.

"As to the article, prince," he said, "I admit that I wrote it, in spite
of the severe criticism of my poor friend, in whom I always overlook
many things because of his unfortunate state of health. But I wrote and
published it in the form of a letter, in the paper of a friend. I showed
it to no one but Burdovsky, and I did not read it all through, even to
him. He immediately gave me permission to publish it, but you will admit
that I might have done so without his consent. Publicity is a noble,
beneficent, and universal right. I hope, prince, that you are too
progressive to deny this?"

"I deny nothing, but you must confess that your article--"

"Is a bit thick, you mean? Well, in a way that is in the public
interest; you will admit that yourself, and after all one cannot
overlook a blatant fact. So much the worse for the guilty parties,
but the public welfare must come before everything. As to certain
inaccuracies and figures of speech, so to speak, you will also admit
that the motive, aim, and intention, are the chief thing. It is a
question, above all, of making a wholesome example; the individual case
can be examined afterwards; and as to the style--well, the thing was
meant to be humorous, so to speak, and, after all, everybody writes like
that; you must admit it yourself! Ha, ha!"

"But, gentlemen, I assure you that you are quite astray," exclaimed the
prince. "You have published this article upon the supposition that I
would never consent to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky. Acting on that conviction,
you have tried to intimidate me by this publication and to be revenged
for my supposed refusal. But what did you know of my intentions? It may
be that I have resolved to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky's claim. I now declare
openly, in the presence of these witnesses, that I will do so."

"The noble and intelligent word of an intelligent and most noble man, at
last!" exclaimed the boxer.

"Good God!" exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna involuntarily.

"This is intolerable," growled the general.

"Allow me, gentlemen, allow me," urged the prince.

"I will explain matters to you. Five weeks ago I received a visit from
Tchebaroff, your agent, Mr. Burdovsky. You have given a very flattering
description of him in your article, Mr. Keller," he continued, turning
to the boxer with a smile, "but he did not please me at all. I saw at
once that Tchebaroff was the moving spirit in the matter, and, to speak
frankly, I thought he might have induced you, Mr. Burdovsky, to make
this claim, by taking advantage of your simplicity."

"You have no right.... I am not simple," stammered Burdovsky, much
agitated.

"You have no sort of right to suppose such things," said Lebedeff's
nephew in a tone of authority.

"It is most offensive!" shrieked Hippolyte; "it is an insulting
suggestion, false, and most ill-timed."

"I beg your pardon, gentlemen; please excuse me," said the prince. "I
thought absolute frankness on both sides would be best, but have it your
own way. I told Tchebaroff that, as I was not in Petersburg, I would
commission a friend to look into the matter without delay, and that I
would let you know, Mr. Burdovsky. Gentlemen, I have no hesitation in
telling you that it was the fact of Tchebaroff's intervention that made
me suspect a fraud. Oh! do not take offence at my words, gentlemen,
for Heaven's sake do not be so touchy!" cried the prince, seeing that
Burdovsky was getting excited again, and that the rest were preparing
to protest. "If I say I suspected a fraud, there is nothing personal in
that. I had never seen any of you then; I did not even know your names;
I only judged by Tchebaroff; I am speaking quite generally--if you only
knew how I have been 'done' since I came into my fortune!"

"You are shockingly naive, prince," said Lebedeff's nephew in mocking
tones.

"Besides, though you are a prince and a millionaire, and even though
you may really be simple and good-hearted, you can hardly be outside the
general law," Hippolyte declared loudly.

"Perhaps not; it is very possible," the prince agreed hastily, "though I
do not know what general law you allude to. I will go on--only please
do not take offence without good cause. I assure you I do not mean to
offend you in the least. Really, it is impossible to speak three words
sincerely without your flying into a rage! At first I was amazed when
Tchebaroff told me that Pavlicheff had a son, and that he was in such
a miserable position. Pavlicheff was my benefactor, and my father's
friend. Oh, Mr. Keller, why does your article impute things to my father
without the slightest foundation? He never squandered the funds of his
company nor ill-treated his subordinates, I am absolutely certain of it;
I cannot imagine how you could bring yourself to write such a calumny!
But your assertions concerning Pavlicheff are absolutely intolerable!
You do not scruple to make a libertine of that noble man; you call him a
sensualist as coolly as if you were speaking the truth, and yet it would
not be possible to find a chaster man. He was even a scholar of note,
and in correspondence with several celebrated scientists, and spent
large sums in the interests of science. As to his kind heart and his
good actions, you were right indeed when you said that I was almost an
idiot at that time, and could hardly understand anything--(I could
speak and understand Russian, though),--but now I can appreciate what I
remember--"

"Excuse me," interrupted Hippolyte, "is not this rather sentimental? You
said you wished to come to the point; please remember that it is after
nine o'clock."

"Very well, gentlemen--very well," replied the prince. "At first I
received the news with mistrust, then I said to myself that I might be
mistaken, and that Pavlicheff might possibly have had a son. But I was
absolutely amazed at the readiness with which the son had revealed
the secret of his birth at the expense of his mother's honour. For
Tchebaroff had already menaced me with publicity in our interview...."

"What nonsense!" Lebedeff's nephew interrupted violently.

"You have no right--you have no right!" cried Burdovsky.

"The son is not responsible for the misdeeds of his father; and the
mother is not to blame," added Hippolyte, with warmth.

"That seems to me all the more reason for sparing her," said the prince
timidly.

"Prince, you are not only simple, but your simplicity is almost past the
limit," said Lebedeff's nephew, with a sarcastic smile.

"But what right had you?" said Hippolyte in a very strange tone.

"None--none whatever," agreed the prince hastily. "I admit you are right
there, but it was involuntary, and I immediately said to myself that my
personal feelings had nothing to do with it,--that if I thought it right
to satisfy the demands of Mr. Burdovsky, out of respect for the memory
of Pavlicheff, I ought to do so in any case, whether I esteemed Mr.
Burdovsky or not. I only mentioned this, gentlemen, because it seemed so
unnatural to me for a son to betray his mother's secret in such a way.
In short, that is what convinced me that Tchebaroff must be a rogue, and
that he had induced Mr. Burdovsky to attempt this fraud."

"But this is intolerable!" cried the visitors, some of them starting to
their feet.

"Gentlemen, I supposed from this that poor Mr. Burdovsky must be a
simple-minded man, quite defenceless, and an easy tool in the hands
of rogues. That is why I thought it my duty to try and help him
as 'Pavlicheff's son'; in the first place by rescuing him from the
influence of Tchebaroff, and secondly by making myself his friend. I
have resolved to give him ten thousand roubles; that is about the sum
which I calculate that Pavlicheff must have spent on me."

"What, only ten thousand!" cried Hippolyte.

"Well, prince, your arithmetic is not up to much, or else you are mighty
clever at it, though you affect the air of a simpleton," said Lebedeff's
nephew.

"I will not accept ten thousand roubles," said Burdovsky.

"Accept, Antip," whispered the boxer eagerly, leaning past the back of
Hippolyte's chair to give his friend this piece of advice. "Take it for
the present; we can see about more later on."

"Look here, Mr. Muishkin," shouted Hippolyte, "please understand that we
are not fools, nor idiots, as your guests seem to imagine; these ladies
who look upon us with such scorn, and especially this fine gentleman"
(pointing to Evgenie Pavlovitch) "whom I have not the honour of knowing,
though I think I have heard some talk about him--"

"Really, really, gentlemen," cried the prince in great agitation, "you
are misunderstanding me again. In the first place, Mr. Keller, you have
greatly overestimated my fortune in your article. I am far from being
a millionaire. I have barely a tenth of what you suppose. Secondly, my
treatment in Switzerland was very far from costing tens of thousands of
roubles. Schneider received six hundred roubles a year, and he was
only paid for the first three years. As to the pretty governesses whom
Pavlicheff is supposed to have brought from Paris, they only exist
in Mr. Keller's imagination; it is another calumny. According to my
calculations, the sum spent on me was very considerably under ten
thousand roubles, but I decided on that sum, and you must admit that
in paying a debt I could not offer Mr. Burdovsky more, however kindly
disposed I might be towards him; delicacy forbids it; I should seem to
be offering him charity instead of rightful payment. I don't know how
you cannot see that, gentlemen! Besides, I had no intention of leaving
the matter there. I meant to intervene amicably later on and help to
improve poor Mr. Burdovsky's position. It is clear that he has been
deceived, or he would never have agreed to anything so vile as the
scandalous revelations about his mother in Mr. Keller's article. But,
gentlemen, why are you getting angry again? Are we never to come to an
understanding? Well, the event has proved me right! I have just seen
with my own eyes the proof that my conjecture was correct!" he added,
with increasing eagerness.

He meant to calm his hearers, and did not perceive that his words had
only increased their irritation.

"What do you mean? What are you convinced of?" they demanded angrily.

"In the first place, I have had the opportunity of getting a correct
idea of Mr. Burdovsky. I see what he is for myself. He is an innocent
man, deceived by everyone! A defenceless victim, who deserves
indulgence! Secondly, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, in whose hands I had
placed the matter, had his first interview with me barely an hour ago.
I had not heard from him for some time, as I was away, and have been ill
for three days since my return to St. Petersburg. He tells me that he
has exposed the designs of Tchebaroff and has proof that justifies my
opinion of him. I know, gentlemen, that many people think me an idiot.
Counting upon my reputation as a man whose purse-strings are easily
loosened, Tchebaroff thought it would be a simple matter to fleece me,
especially by trading on my gratitude to Pavlicheff. But the main
point is--listen, gentlemen, let me finish!--the main point is that Mr.
Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff's son at all. Gavrila Ardalionovitch has
just told me of his discovery, and assures me that he has positive
proofs. Well, what do you think of that? It is scarcely credible, even
after all the tricks that have been played upon me. Please note that we
have positive proofs! I can hardly believe it myself, I assure you; I do
not yet believe it; I am still doubtful, because Gavrila Ardalionovitch
has not had time to go into details; but there can be no further doubt
that Tchebaroff is a rogue! He has deceived poor Mr. Burdovsky, and
all of you, gentlemen, who have come forward so nobly to support your
friend--(he evidently needs support, I quite see that!). He has abused
your credulity and involved you all in an attempted fraud, for when all
is said and done this claim is nothing else!"

"What! a fraud? What, he is not Pavlicheff's son? Impossible!"

These exclamations but feebly expressed the profound bewilderment into
which the prince's words had plunged Burdovsky's companions.

"Certainly it is a fraud! Since Mr. Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff's son,
his claim is neither more nor less than attempted fraud (supposing, of
course, that he had known the truth), but the fact is that he has been
deceived. I insist on this point in order to justify him; I repeat that
his simple-mindedness makes him worthy of pity, and that he cannot stand
alone; otherwise he would have behaved like a scoundrel in this matter.
But I feel certain that he does not understand it! I was just the same
myself before I went to Switzerland; I stammered incoherently; one tries
to express oneself and cannot. I understand that. I am all the better
able to pity Mr. Burdovsky, because I know from experience what it is to
be like that, and so I have a right to speak. Well, though there is no
such person as 'Pavlicheff's son,' and it is all nothing but a humbug,
yet I will keep to my decision, and I am prepared to give up ten
thousand roubles in memory of Pavlicheff. Before Mr. Burdovsky made this
claim, I proposed to found a school with this money, in memory of my
benefactor, but I shall honour his memory quite as well by giving
the ten thousand roubles to Mr. Burdovsky, because, though he was not
Pavlicheff's son, he was treated almost as though he were. That is
what gave a rogue the opportunity of deceiving him; he really did
think himself Pavlicheff's son. Listen, gentlemen; this matter must
be settled; keep calm; do not get angry; and sit down! Gavrila
Ardalionovitch will explain everything to you at once, and I confess
that I am very anxious to hear all the details myself. He says that he
has even been to Pskoff to see your mother, Mr. Burdovsky; she is not
dead, as the article which was just read to us makes out. Sit down,
gentlemen, sit down!"

The prince sat down, and at length prevailed upon Burdovsky's company
to do likewise. During the last ten or twenty minutes, exasperated by
continual interruptions, he had raised his voice, and spoken with
great vehemence. Now, no doubt, he bitterly regretted several words and
expressions which had escaped him in his excitement. If he had not been
driven beyond the limits of endurance, he would not have ventured to
express certain conjectures so openly. He had no sooner sat down than
his heart was torn by sharp remorse. Besides insulting Burdovsky
with the supposition, made in the presence of witnesses, that he was
suffering from the complaint for which he had himself been treated
in Switzerland, he reproached himself with the grossest indelicacy in
having offered him the ten thousand roubles before everyone. "I ought
to have waited till to-morrow and offered him the money when we were
alone," thought Muishkin. "Now it is too late, the mischief is done!
Yes, I am an idiot, an absolute idiot!" he said to himself, overcome
with shame and regret.

Till then Gavrila Ardalionovitch had sat apart in silence. When the
prince called upon him, he came and stood by his side, and in a calm,
clear voice began to render an account of the mission confided to him.
All conversation ceased instantly. Everyone, especially the Burdovsky
party, listened with the utmost curiosity.

IX.

"You will not deny, I am sure," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, turning
to Burdovsky, who sat looking at him with wide-open eyes, perplexed and
astonished. You will not deny, seriously, that you were born just two
years after your mother's legal marriage to Mr. Burdovsky, your father.
Nothing would be easier than to prove the date of your birth from
well-known facts; we can only look on Mr. Keller's version as a work of
imagination, and one, moreover, extremely offensive both to you and your
mother. Of course he distorted the truth in order to strengthen your
claim, and to serve your interests. Mr. Keller said that he previously
consulted you about his article in the paper, but did not read it to you
as a whole. Certainly he could not have read that passage. ....

"As a matter of fact, I did not read it," interrupted the boxer, "but
its contents had been given me on unimpeachable authority, and I..."

"Excuse me, Mr. Keller," interposed Gavrila Ardalionovitch. "Allow me to
speak. I assure you your article shall be mentioned in its proper place,
and you can then explain everything, but for the moment I would rather
not anticipate. Quite accidentally, with the help of my sister, Varvara
Ardalionovna Ptitsin, I obtained from one of her intimate friends,
Madame Zoubkoff, a letter written to her twenty-five years ago,
by Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, then abroad. After getting
into communication with this lady, I went by her advice to Timofei
Fedorovitch Viazovkin, a retired colonel, and one of Pavlicheff's oldest
friends. He gave me two more letters written by the latter when he was
still in foreign parts. These three documents, their dates, and the
facts mentioned in them, prove in the most undeniable manner, that
eighteen months before your birth, Nicolai Andreevitch went abroad,
where he remained for three consecutive years. Your mother, as you are
well aware, has never been out of Russia.... It is too late to read the
letters now; I am content to state the fact. But if you desire it, come
to me tomorrow morning, bring witnesses and writing experts with you,
and I will prove the absolute truth of my story. From that moment the
question will be decided."

These words caused a sensation among the listeners, and there was a
general movement of relief. Burdovsky got up abruptly.

"If that is true," said he, "I have been deceived, grossly deceived, but
not by Tchebaroff: and for a long time past, a long time. I do not
wish for experts, not I, nor to go to see you. I believe you. I give it
up.... But I refuse the ten thousand roubles. Good-bye."

"Wait five minutes more, Mr. Burdovsky," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch
pleasantly. "I have more to say. Some rather curious and important facts
have come to light, and it is absolutely necessary, in my opinion, that
you should hear them. You will not regret, I fancy, to have the whole
matter thoroughly cleared up."

Burdovsky silently resumed his seat, and bent his head as though in
profound thought. His friend, Lebedeff's nephew, who had risen to
accompany him, also sat down again. He seemed much disappointed, though
as self-confident as ever. Hippolyte looked dejected and sulky, as well
as surprised. He had just been attacked by a violent fit of coughing,
so that his handkerchief was stained with blood. The boxer looked
thoroughly frightened.

"Oh, Antip!" cried he in a miserable voice, "I did say to you the
other day--the day before yesterday--that perhaps you were not really
Pavlicheff's son!"

There were sounds of half-smothered laughter at this.

"Now, that is a valuable piece of information, Mr. Keller," replied
Gania. "However that may be, I have private information which convinces
me that Mr. Burdovsky, though doubtless aware of the date of his birth,
knew nothing at all about Pavlicheff's sojourn abroad. Indeed, he passed
the greater part of his life out of Russia, returning at intervals for
short visits. The journey in question is in itself too unimportant for
his friends to recollect it after more than twenty years; and of course
Mr. Burdovsky could have known nothing about it, for he was not born.
As the event has proved, it was not impossible to find evidence of his
absence, though I must confess that chance has helped me in a quest
which might very well have come to nothing. It was really almost
impossible for Burdovsky or Tchebaroff to discover these facts, even if
it had entered their heads to try. Naturally they never dreamt..."

Here the voice of Hippolyte suddenly intervened.

"Allow me, Mr. Ivolgin," he said irritably. "What is the good of all
this rigmarole? Pardon me. All is now clear, and we acknowledge the
truth of your main point. Why go into these tedious details? You wish
perhaps to boast of the cleverness of your investigation, to cry up your
talents as detective? Or perhaps your intention is to excuse Burdovsky,
by roving that he took up the matter in ignorance? Well, I consider that
extremely impudent on your part! You ought to know that Burdovsky has
no need of being excused or justified by you or anyone else! It is an
insult! The affair is quite painful enough for him without that. Will
nothing make you understand?"

"Enough! enough! Mr. Terentieff," interrupted Gania.

"Don't excite yourself; you seem very ill, and I am sorry for that. I am
almost done, but there are a few facts to which I must briefly refer, as
I am convinced that they ought to be clearly explained once for all...."
A movement of impatience was noticed in his audience as he resumed: "I
merely wish to state, for the information of all concerned, that the
reason for Mr. Pavlicheff's interest in your mother, Mr. Burdovsky, was
simply that she was the sister of a serf-girl with whom he was deeply in
love in his youth, and whom most certainly he would have married but for
her sudden death. I have proofs that this circumstance is almost, if not
quite, forgotten. I may add that when your mother was about ten years
old, Pavlicheff took her under his care, gave her a good education, and
later, a considerable dowry. His relations were alarmed, and feared
he might go so far as to marry her, but she gave her hand to a young
land-surveyor named Burdovsky when she reached the age of twenty. I
can even say definitely that it was a marriage of affection. After his
wedding your father gave up his occupation as land-surveyor, and with
his wife's dowry of fifteen thousand roubles went in for commercial
speculations. As he had had no experience, he was cheated on all sides,
and took to drink in order to forget his troubles. He shortened his life
by his excesses, and eight years after his marriage he died. Your mother
says herself that she was left in the direst poverty, and would have
died of starvation had it not been for Pavlicheff, who generously
allowed her a yearly pension of six hundred roubles. Many people recall
his extreme fondness for you as a little boy. Your mother confirms this,
and agrees with others in thinking that he loved you the more because
you were a sickly child, stammering in your speech, and almost
deformed--for it is known that all his life Nicolai Andreevitch had a
partiality for unfortunates of every kind, especially children. In my
opinion this is most important. I may add that I discovered yet another
fact, the last on which I employed my detective powers. Seeing how fond
Pavlicheff was of you,--it was thanks to him you went to school, and
also had the advantage of special teachers--his relations and servants
grew to believe that you were his son, and that your father had been
betrayed by his wife. I may point out that this idea was only accredited
generally during the last years of Pavlicheff's life, when his
next-of-kin were trembling about the succession, when the earlier story
was quite forgotten, and when all opportunity for discovering the truth
had seemingly passed away. No doubt you, Mr. Burdovsky, heard this
conjecture, and did not hesitate to accept it as true. I have had the
honour of making your mother's acquaintance, and I find that she knows
all about these reports. What she does not know is that you, her son,
should have listened to them so complaisantly. I found your respected
mother at Pskoff, ill and in deep poverty, as she has been ever since
the death of your benefactor. She told me with tears of gratitude how
you had supported her; she expects much of you, and believes fervently
in your future success..."

"Oh, this is unbearable!" said Lebedeff's nephew impatiently. "What is
the good of all this romancing?"

"It is revolting and unseemly!" cried Hippolyte, jumping up in a fury.

Burdovsky alone sat silent and motionless.

"What is the good of it?" repeated Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
pretended surprise. "Well, firstly, because now perhaps Mr. Burdovsky
is quite convinced that Mr. Pavlicheff's love for him came simply from
generosity of soul, and not from paternal duty. It was most necessary
to impress this fact upon his mind, considering that he approved of the
article written by Mr. Keller. I speak thus because I look on you, Mr.
Burdovsky, as an honourable man. Secondly, it appears that there was no
intention of cheating in this case, even on the part of Tchebaroff. I
wish to say this quite plainly, because the prince hinted a while
ago that I too thought it an attempt at robbery and extortion. On the
contrary, everyone has been quite sincere in the matter, and although
Tchebaroff may be somewhat of a rogue, in this business he has acted
simply as any sharp lawyer would do under the circumstances. He looked
at it as a case that might bring him in a lot of money, and he did not
calculate badly; because on the one hand he speculated on the generosity
of the prince, and his gratitude to the late Mr. Pavlicheff, and on
the other to his chivalrous ideas as to the obligations of honour and
conscience. As to Mr. Burdovsky, allowing for his principles, we may
acknowledge that he engaged in the business with very little personal
aim in view. At the instigation of Tchebaroff and his other friends,
he decided to make the attempt in the service of truth, progress, and
humanity. In short, the conclusion may be drawn that, in spite of all
appearances, Mr. Burdovsky is a man of irreproachable character, and
thus the prince can all the more readily offer him his friendship, and
the assistance of which he spoke just now..."

"Hush! hush! Gavrila Ardalionovitch!" cried Muishkin in dismay, but it
was too late.

"I said, and I have repeated it over and over again," shouted Burdovsky
furiously, "that I did not want the money. I will not take it... why...I
will not... I am going away!"

He was rushing hurriedly from the terrace, when Lebedeff's nephew seized
his arms, and said something to him in a low voice. Burdovsky turned
quickly, and drawing an addressed but unsealed envelope from his pocket,
he threw it down on a little table beside the prince.

"There's the money!... How dare you?... The money!"

"Those are the two hundred and fifty roubles you dared to send him as a
charity, by the hands of Tchebaroff," explained Doktorenko.

"The article in the newspaper put it at fifty!" cried Colia.

"I beg your pardon," said the prince, going up to Burdovsky. "I have
done you a great wrong, but I did not send you that money as a charity,
believe me. And now I am again to blame. I offended you just now." (The
prince was much distressed; he seemed worn out with fatigue, and spoke
almost incoherently.) "I spoke of swindling... but I did not apply that
to you. I was deceived .... I said you were... afflicted... like me...
But you are not like me... you give lessons... you support your mother.
I said you had dishonoured your mother, but you love her. She says so
herself... I did not know... Gavrila Ardalionovitch did not tell me
that... Forgive me! I dared to offer you ten thousand roubles, but I was
wrong. I ought to have done it differently, and now... there is no way
of doing it, for you despise me..."

"I declare, this is a lunatic asylum!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"Of course it is a lunatic asylum!" repeated Aglaya sharply, but her
words were overpowered by other voices. Everybody was talking loudly,
making remarks and comments; some discussed the affair gravely, others
laughed. Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was extremely indignant. He stood
waiting for his wife with an air of offended dignity. Lebedeff's nephew
took up the word again.

"Well, prince, to do you justice, you certainly know how to make the
most of your--let us call it infirmity, for the sake of politeness; you
have set about offering your money and friendship in such a way that
no self-respecting man could possibly accept them. This is an excess of
ingenuousness or of malice--you ought to know better than anyone which
word best fits the case."

"Allow me, gentlemen," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who had just
examined the contents of the envelope, "there are only a hundred roubles
here, not two hundred and fifty. I point this out, prince, to prevent
misunderstanding."

"Never mind, never mind," said the prince, signing to him to keep quiet.

"But we do mind," said Lebedeff's nephew vehemently. "Prince, your
'never mind' is an insult to us. We have nothing to hide; our actions
can bear daylight. It is true that there are only a hundred roubles
instead of two hundred and fifty, but it is all the same."

"Why, no, it is hardly the same," remarked Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
an air of ingenuous surprise.

"Don't interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr. Lawyer," cried
Lebedeff's nephew angrily. "Of course there is a difference between
a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this case the
principle is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles
are missing is only a side issue. The point to be emphasized is that
Burdovsky will not accept your highness's charity; he flings it back in
your face, and it scarcely matters if there are a hundred roubles or two
hundred and fifty. Burdovsky has refused ten thousand roubles; you
heard him. He would not have returned even a hundred roubles if he was
dishonest! The hundred and fifty roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for
his travelling expenses. You may jeer at our stupidity and at our
inexperience in business matters; you have done all you could already to
make us look ridiculous; but do not dare to call us dishonest. The
four of us will club together every day to repay the hundred and fifty
roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it in instalments of a rouble
at a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdovsky is poor, he
has no millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff sent in
his bill. We counted on winning... Who would not have done the same in
such a case?"

"Who indeed?" exclaimed Prince S.

"I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"It reminds me," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, "of the famous plea
of a certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six people
in order to rob them. He excused his client on the score of poverty.
'It is quite natural,' he said in conclusion, 'considering the state
of misery he was in, that he should have thought of murdering these six
people; which of you, gentlemen, would not have done the same in his
place?'"

"Enough," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with anger,
"we have had enough of this balderdash!"

In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming
eyes, casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company,
in which she could no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had
restrained herself so long that she felt forced to vent her rage on
somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha Prokofievna saw at once how it was
with her. "She flies into these rages sometimes," said Ivan Fedorovitch
to Prince S. the next day, "but she is not often so violent as she was
yesterday; it does not happen more than once in three years."

"Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!" cried Mrs. Epanchin. "Why
do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take me away
before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag
me away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly.
You might at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our
way out now without your help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait
a moment 'till I thank the prince! Thank you, prince, for the
entertainment you have given us! It was most amusing to hear these young
men... It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal, worse than a nightmare!
Is it possible that there can be many such people on earth? Be quiet,
Aglaya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business! Don't fuss
round me like that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me! So, my dear,"
she cried, addressing the prince, "you go so far as to beg their
pardon! He says, 'Forgive me for offering you a fortune.' And you, you
mountebank, what are you laughing at?" she cried, turning suddenly on
Lebedeff's nephew. "'We refuse ten thousand roubles; we do not beseech,
we demand!' As if he did not know that this idiot will call on them
tomorrow to renew his offers of money and friendship. You will, won't
you? You will? Come, will you, or won't you?"

"I shall," said the prince, with gentle humility.

"You hear him! You count upon it, too," she continued, turning upon
Doktorenko. "You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your
pocket. And there you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our
eyes! No, my dear sir, you may take other people in! I can see through
all your airs and graces, I see your game!"

"Lizabetha Prokofievna!" exclaimed the prince.

"Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going,
we will take the prince with us," said Prince S. with a smile, in the
coolest possible way.

The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively
horrified. Mrs. Epanchin's language astonished everybody. Some who stood
a little way off smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore
an expression of utmost ecstasy.

"Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame," remarked
Doktorenko, who was considerably put out of countenance.

"Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us, sir,"
answered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage. "Leave
me alone, will you?" she cried violently to those around her, who were
trying to keep her quiet. "No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as you said
yourself just now, a lawyer said in open court that he found it quite
natural that a man should murder six people because he was in misery,
the world must be coming to an end. I had not heard of it before. Now
I understand everything. And this stutterer, won't he turn out a
murderer?" she cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with
stupefaction. "I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly,
he will refuse it because his conscience will not allow him to accept
it, but he will go murdering you by night and walking off with your
cashbox, with a clear conscience! He does not call it a dishonest action
but 'the impulse of a noble despair'; 'a negation'; or the devil knows
what! Bah! everything is upside down, everyone walks head downwards. A
young girl, brought up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in the
middle of the street, saying: 'Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or
Ivanitch, the other day!' And you think it quite right? You call such
conduct estimable and natural? The 'woman question'? Look here," she
continued, pointing to Colia, "the other day that whippersnapper told
me that this was the whole meaning of the 'woman question.' But even
supposing that your mother is a fool, you are none the less, bound to
treat her with humanity. Why did you come here tonight so insolently?
'Give us our rights, but don't dare to speak in our presence. Show us
every mark of deepest respect, while we treat you like the scum of
the earth.' The miscreants have written a tissue of calumny in their
article, and these are the men who seek for truth, and do battle for the
right! 'We do not beseech, we demand, you will get no thanks from
us, because you will be acting to satisfy your own conscience!'
What morality! But, good heavens! if you declare that the prince's
generosity will, excite no gratitude in you, he might answer that he is
not, bound to be grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only satisfying
his own conscience. But you counted on the prince's, gratitude towards
Pavlicheff; you never lent him any money; he owes you nothing; then what
were you counting upon if not on his gratitude? And if you appeal to
that sentiment in others, why should you expect to be exempted from
it? They are mad! They say society is savage and inhuman because it
despises a young girl who has been seduced. But if you call society
inhuman you imply that the young girl is made to suffer by its censure.
How then, can you hold her up to the scorn of society in the newspapers
without realizing that you are making her suffering, still greater?
Madmen! Vain fools! They don't believe in God, they don't believe in
Christ! But you are so eaten up by pride and vanity, that you will end
by devouring each other--that is my prophecy! Is not this absurd? Is it
not monstrous chaos? And after all this, that shameless creature will
go and beg their pardon! Are there many people like you? What are
you smiling at? Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before
you?--Yes, I am disgraced--it can't be helped now! But don't you jeer at
me, you scum!" (this was aimed at Hippolyte). "He is almost at his last
gasp, yet he corrupts others. You, have got hold of this lad "--(she
pointed to Colia); "you, have turned his head, you have taught him to
be an atheist, you don't believe in God, and you are not too old to be
whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,
you will call on them tomorrow, will you?" she asked the prince
breathlessly, for the second time.

"Yes."

"Then I will never speak to you again." She made a sudden movement to
go, and then turned quickly back. "And you will call on that atheist?"
she continued, pointing to Hippolyte. "How dare you grin at me like
that?" she shouted furiously, rushing at the invalid, whose mocking
smile drove her to distraction.

Exclamations arose on all sides.

"Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna!"

"Mother, this is disgraceful!" cried Aglaya.

Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm,
while her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.

"Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch," he answered calmly; "your
mother knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to explain
why I was laughing. I shall be delighted if you will let me--"

A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him
from finishing his sentence.

"He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she
saw him wiping the blood from his lips. "Why do you talk? You ought to
go home to bed."

"So I will," he whispered hoarsely. "As soon as I get home I will go to
bed at once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight; Botkine told me
so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few farewell
words, if you will let me."

"But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of
yourself; what is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed,
do!" cried Mrs. Epanchin in horror.

"When I do go to bed I shall never get up again," said Hippolyte, with a
smile. "I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I died,
but as my legs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to
come here with them to-day--but I am very tired."

"Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?"

Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.

"Thank you," he said gently. "Sit opposite to me, and let us talk. We
must have a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for it."
He smiled at her once more. "Remember that today, for the last time, I
am out in the air, and in the company of my fellow-men, and that in a
fortnight I shall I certainly be no longer in this world. So, in a way,
this is my farewell to nature and to men. I am not very sentimental,
but do you know, I am quite glad that all this has happened at Pavlofsk,
where at least one can see a green tree."

"But why talk now?" replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more
alarmed; "are quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting, and
now you can hardly breathe. You are gasping."

"I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish? Do you
know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a
long while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only
person who still comes to see me. You are an original and eccentric
woman; I have seen that for myself--Do you know, I have even been rather
fond of you?"

"Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!"

"You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That
is your daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized
her directly, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least,
look on beauty for the last time in my life," he said with a wry smile.
"You are here with the prince, and your husband, and a large company.
Why should you refuse to gratify my last wish?"

"Give me a chair!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one for
herself and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. "Colia, you must go home
with him," she commanded, "and tomorrow I will come my self."

"Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea?... I am exhausted. Do
you know what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna? I think you wanted to
take the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and let us spend
the evening together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea.
Forgive me for being so free and easy--but I know you are kind, and
the prince is kind, too. In fact, we are all good-natured people--it is
really quite comical."

The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out,
followed by Vera.

"It is quite true," said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. "Talk, but not too
loud, and don't excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you. Prince,
you don't deserve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I will,
all the same, but I won't apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody! It
is absurd! However, forgive me, prince, if I blew you up--that is, if
you like, of course. But please don't let me keep anyone," she added
suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of resentment, as
though they had grievously offended her. "I can come home alone quite
well."

But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly. The
prince immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized
for not having thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite
words, and asked Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the
terrace. He very nearly asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the
University, but stopped himself in time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince
S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable. Adelaida and Alexandra
had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now mingled with
satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that
Lizabetha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still
frowned, and sat apart in silence. All the other guests stayed on as
well; no one wanted to go, not even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said
something to him in passing which did not seem to please him, for he
immediately went and sulked in a corner. The prince took care to offer
tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well as the rest. The invitation
made them rather uncomfortable. They muttered that they would wait for
Hippolyte, and went and sat by themselves in a distant corner of the
verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no doubt ordered it
for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was striking
eleven.

X.

AFTER moistening his lips with the tea which Vera Lebedeff brought him,
Hippolyte set the cup down on the table, and glanced round. He seemed
confused and almost at a loss.

"Just look, Lizabetha Prokofievna," he began, with a kind of feverish
haste; "these china cups are supposed to be extremely valuable. Lebedeff
always keeps them locked up in his china-cupboard; they were part of his
wife's dowry. Yet he has brought them out tonight--in your honour, of
course! He is so pleased--" He was about to add something else, but
could not find the words.

"There, he is feeling embarrassed; I expected as much," whispered
Evgenie Pavlovitch suddenly in the prince's ear. "It is a bad sign;
what do you think? Now, out of spite, he will come out with something
so outrageous that even Lizabetha Prokofievna will not be able to stand
it."

Muishkin looked at him inquiringly.

"You do not care if he does?" added Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Neither do I;
in fact, I should be glad, merely as a proper punishment for our dear
Lizabetha Prokofievna. I am very anxious that she should get it, without
delay, and I shall stay till she does. You seem feverish."

"Never mind; by-and-by; yes, I am not feeling well," said the prince
impatiently, hardly listening. He had just heard Hippolyte mention his
own name.

"You don't believe it?" said the invalid, with a nervous laugh. "I don't
wonder, but the prince will have no difficulty in believing it; he will
not be at all surprised."

"Do you hear, prince--do you hear that?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
turning towards him.

There was laughter in the group around her, and Lebedeff stood before
her gesticulating wildly.

"He declares that your humbug of a landlord revised this gentleman's
article--the article that was read aloud just now--in which you got such
a charming dressing-down."

The prince regarded Lebedeff with astonishment.

"Why don't you say something?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, stamping her
foot.

"Well," murmured the prince, with his eyes still fixed on Lebedeff, "I
can see now that he did."

"Is it true?" she asked eagerly.

"Absolutely, your excellency," said Lebedeff, without the least
hesitation.

Mrs. Epanchin almost sprang up in amazement at his answer, and at the
assurance of his tone.

"He actually seems to boast of it!" she cried.

"I am base--base!" muttered Lebedeff, beating his breast, and hanging
his head.

"What do I care if you are base or not? He thinks he has only to say,
'I am base,' and there is an end of it. As to you, prince, are you not
ashamed?--I repeat, are you not ashamed, to mix with such riff-raff? I
will never forgive you!"

"The prince will forgive me!" said Lebedeff with emotional conviction.

Keller suddenly left his seat, and approached Lizabetha. Prokofievna.

"It was only out of generosity, madame," he said in a resonant voice,
"and because I would not betray a friend in an awkward position, that
I did not mention this revision before; though you heard him yourself
threatening to kick us down the steps. To clear the matter up, I declare
now that I did have recourse to his assistance, and that I paid him six
roubles for it. But I did not ask him to correct my style; I simply went
to him for information concerning the facts, of which I was ignorant
to a great extent, and which he was competent to give. The story of the
gaiters, the appetite in the Swiss professor's house, the substitution
of fifty roubles for two hundred and fifty--all such details, in fact,
were got from him. I paid him six roubles for them; but he did not
correct the style."

"I must state that I only revised the first part of the article,"
interposed Lebedeff with feverish impatience, while laughter rose from
all around him; "but we fell out in the middle over one idea, so I never
corrected the second part. Therefore I cannot be held responsible for
the numerous grammatical blunders in it."

"That is all he thinks of!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"May I ask when this article was revised?" said Evgenie Pavlovitch to
Keller.

"Yesterday morning," he replied, "we had an interview which we all gave
our word of honour to keep secret."

"The very time when he was cringing before you and making protestations
of devotion! Oh, the mean wretches! I will have nothing to do with your
Pushkin, and your daughter shall not set foot in my house!"

Lizabetha Prokofievna was about to rise, when she saw Hippolyte
laughing, and turned upon him with irritation.

"Well, sir, I suppose you wanted to make me look ridiculous?"

"Heaven forbid!" he answered, with a forced smile. "But I am more than
ever struck by your eccentricity, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I admit that I
told you of Lebedeff's duplicity, on purpose. I knew the effect it would
have on you,--on you alone, for the prince will forgive him. He has
probably forgiven him already, and is racking his brains to find some
excuse for him--is not that the truth, prince?"

He gasped as he spoke, and his strange agitation seemed to increase.

"Well?" said Mrs. Epanchin angrily, surprised at his tone; "well, what
more?"

"I have heard many things of the kind about you...they delighted me... I
have learned to hold you in the highest esteem," continued Hippolyte.

His words seemed tinged with a kind of sarcastic mockery, yet he was
extremely agitated, casting suspicious glances around him, growing
confused, and constantly losing the thread of his ideas. All this,
together with his consumptive appearance, and the frenzied expression of
his blazing eyes, naturally attracted the attention of everyone present.

"I might have been surprised (though I admit I know nothing of the
world), not only that you should have stayed on just now in the company
of such people as myself and my friends, who are not of your class, but
that you should let these... young ladies listen to such a scandalous
affair, though no doubt novel-reading has taught them all there is to
know. I may be mistaken; I hardly know what I am saying; but surely
no one but you would have stayed to please a whippersnapper (yes,
a whippersnapper; I admit it) to spend the evening and take part in
everything--only to be ashamed of it tomorrow. (I know I express myself
badly.) I admire and appreciate it all extremely, though the expression
on the face of his excellency, your husband, shows that he thinks it
very improper. He-he!" He burst out laughing, and was seized with a
fit of coughing which lasted for two minutes and prevented him from
speaking.

"He has lost his breath now!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna coldly, looking
at him with more curiosity than pity: "Come, my dear boy, that is quite
enough--let us make an end of this."

Ivan Fedorovitch, now quite out of patience, interrupted suddenly. "Let
me remark in my turn, sir," he said in tones of deep annoyance, "that
my wife is here as the guest of Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, our friend and
neighbour, and that in any case, young man, it is not for you to pass
judgment on the conduct of Lizabetha Prokofievna, or to make remarks
aloud in my presence concerning what feelings you think may be read
in my face. Yes, my wife stayed here," continued the general, with
increasing irritation, "more out of amazement than anything else.
Everyone can understand that a collection of such strange young men
would attract the attention of a person interested in contemporary life.
I stayed myself, just as I sometimes stop to look on in the street when
I see something that may be regarded as-as-as-"

"As a curiosity," suggested Evgenie Pavlovitch, seeing his excellency
involved in a comparison which he could not complete.

"That is exactly the word I wanted," said the general with
satisfaction--"a curiosity. However, the most astonishing and, if I may
so express myself, the most painful, thing in this matter, is that you
cannot even understand, young man, that Lizabetha Prokofievna, only
stayed with you because you are ill,--if you really are dying--moved
by the pity awakened by your plaintive appeal, and that her
name, character, and social position place her above all risk of
contamination. Lizabetha Prokofievna!" he continued, now crimson with
rage, "if you are coming, we will say goodnight to the prince, and--"

"Thank you for the lesson, general," said Hippolyte, with unexpected
gravity, regarding him thoughtfully.

"Two minutes more, if you please, dear Ivan Fedorovitch," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna to her husband; "it seems to me that he is in a fever
and delirious; you can see by his eyes what a state he is in; it is
impossible to let him go back to Petersburg tonight. Can you put him
up, Lef Nicolaievitch? I hope you are not bored, dear prince," she
added suddenly to Prince S. "Alexandra, my dear, come here! Your hair is
coming down."

She arranged her daughter's hair, which was not in the least disordered,
and gave her a kiss. This was all that she had called her for.

"I thought you were capable of development," said Hippolyte, coming out
of his fit of abstraction. "Yes, that is what I meant to say," he added,
with the satisfaction of one who suddenly remembers something he had
forgotten. "Here is Burdovsky, sincerely anxious to protect his mother;
is not that so? And he himself is the cause of her disgrace. The prince
is anxious to help Burdovsky and offers him friendship and a large sum
of money, in the sincerity of his heart. And here they stand like two
sworn enemies--ha, ha, ha! You all hate Burdovsky because his behaviour
with regard to his mother is shocking and repugnant to you; do you not?
Is not that true? Is it not true? You all have a passion for beauty and
distinction in outward forms; that is all you care for, isn't it? I have
suspected for a long time that you cared for nothing else! Well, let me
tell you that perhaps there is not one of you who loved your mother as
Burdovsky loved his. As to you, prince, I know that you have sent money
secretly to Burdovsky's mother through Gania. Well, I bet now," he
continued with an hysterical laugh, "that Burdovsky will accuse you of
indelicacy, and reproach you with a want of respect for his mother! Yes,
that is quite certain! Ha, ha, ha!"

He caught his breath, and began to cough once more.

"Come, that is enough! That is all now; you have no more to say? Now
go to bed; you are burning with fever," said Lizabetha Prokofievna
impatiently. Her anxious eyes had never left the invalid. "Good heavens,
he is going to begin again!"

"You are laughing, I think? Why do you keep laughing at me?" said
Hippolyte irritably to Evgenie Pavlovitch, who certainly was laughing.

"I only want to know, Mr. Hippolyte--excuse me, I forget your surname."

"Mr. Terentieff," said the prince.

"Oh yes, Mr. Terentieff. Thank you prince. I heard it just now, but had
forgotten it. I want to know, Mr. Terentieff, if what I have heard about
you is true. It seems you are convinced that if you could speak to the
people from a window for a quarter of an hour, you could make them all
adopt your views and follow you?"

"I may have said so," answered Hippolyte, as if trying to remember.
"Yes, I certainly said so," he continued with sudden animation, fixing
an unflinching glance on his questioner. "What of it?"

"Nothing. I was only seeking further information, to put the finishing
touch." Evgenie Pavlovitch was silent, but Hippolyte kept his eyes fixed
upon him, waiting impatiently for more.

"Well, have you finished?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to Evgenie. "Make
haste, sir; it is time he went to bed. Have you more to say?" She was
very angry.

"Yes, I have a little more," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, with a smile. "It
seems to me that all you and your friends have said, Mr. Terentieff, and
all you have just put forward with such undeniable talent, may be summed
up in the triumph of right above all, independent of everything else, to
the exclusion of everything else; perhaps even before having discovered
what constitutes the right. I may be mistaken?"

"You are certainly mistaken; I do not even understand you. What else?"

Murmurs arose in the neighbourhood of Burdovsky and his companions;
Lebedeff's nephew protested under his breath.

"I have nearly finished," replied Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"I will only remark that from these premises one could conclude that
might is right--I mean the right of the clenched fist, and of personal
inclination. Indeed, the world has often come to that conclusion.
Prudhon upheld that might is right. In the American War some of the most
advanced Liberals took sides with the planters on the score that the
blacks were an inferior race to the whites, and that might was the right
of the white race."

"Well?"

"You mean, no doubt, that you do not deny that might is right?"

"What then?"

"You are at least logical. I would only point out that from the right
of might, to the right of tigers and crocodiles, or even Daniloff and
Gorsky, is but a step."

"I know nothing about that; what else?"

Hippolyte was scarcely listening. He kept saying "well?" and "what else?"
mechanically, without the least curiosity, and by mere force of habit.

"Why, nothing else; that is all."

"However, I bear you no grudge," said Hippolyte suddenly, and, hardly
conscious of what he was doing, he held out his hand with a smile. The
gesture took Evgenie Pavlovitch by surprise, but with the utmost gravity
he touched the hand that was offered him in token of forgiveness.

"I can but thank you," he said, in a tone too respectful to be sincere,
"for your kindness in letting me speak, for I have often noticed that
