I would have the satisfaction of settling accounts with you in a very
thorough manner before I said good-bye to you. I intend to perform this
operation now, if you like; after you, though, of course."

"May I ask you to be so good as to leave this room?"

"You'd better speak out. You'll be sorry afterwards if you don't."

"Hippolyte, stop, please! It's so dreadfully undignified," said Varia.

"Well, only for the sake of a lady," said Hippolyte, laughing. "I
am ready to put off the reckoning, but only put it off, Varvara
Ardalionovna, because an explanation between your brother and myself has
become an absolute necessity, and I could not think of leaving the house
without clearing up all misunderstandings first."

"In a word, you are a wretched little scandal-monger," cried Gania, "and
you cannot go away without a scandal!"

"You see," said Hippolyte, coolly, "you can't restrain yourself. You'll
be dreadfully sorry afterwards if you don't speak out now. Come, you
shall have the first say. I'll wait."

Gania was silent and merely looked contemptuously at him.

"You won't? Very well. I shall be as short as possible, for my part. Two
or three times to-day I have had the word 'hospitality' pushed down my
throat; this is not fair. In inviting me here you yourself entrapped
me for your own use; you thought I wished to revenge myself upon the
prince. You heard that Aglaya Ivanovna had been kind to me and read my
confession. Making sure that I should give myself up to your interests,
you hoped that you might get some assistance out of me. I will not go
into details. I don't ask either admission or confirmation of this from
yourself; I am quite content to leave you to your conscience, and to
feel that we understand one another capitally."

"What a history you are weaving out of the most ordinary circumstances!"
cried Varia.

"I told you the fellow was nothing but a scandalmonger," said Gania.

"Excuse me, Varia Ardalionovna, I will proceed. I can, of course,
neither love nor respect the prince, though he is a good-hearted fellow,
if a little queer. But there is no need whatever for me to hate him. I
quite understood your brother when he first offered me aid against the
prince, though I did not show it; I knew well that your brother was
making a ridiculous mistake in me. I am ready to spare him, however,
even now; but solely out of respect for yourself, Varvara Ardalionovna.

"Having now shown you that I am not quite such a fool as I look, and
that I have to be fished for with a rod and line for a good long while
before I am caught, I will proceed to explain why I specially wished to
make your brother look a fool. That my motive power is hate, I do not
attempt to conceal. I have felt that before dying (and I am dying,
however much fatter I may appear to you), I must absolutely make a fool
of, at least, one of that class of men which has dogged me all my life,
which I hate so cordially, and which is so prominently represented by
your much esteemed brother. I should not enjoy paradise nearly so much
without having done this first. I hate you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
solely (this may seem curious to you, but I repeat)--solely because you
are the type, and incarnation, and head, and crown of the most impudent,
the most self-satisfied, the most vulgar and detestable form of
commonplaceness. You are ordinary of the ordinary; you have no chance of
ever fathering the pettiest idea of your own. And yet you are as jealous
and conceited as you can possibly be; you consider yourself a great
genius; of this you are persuaded, although there are dark moments of
doubt and rage, when even this fact seems uncertain. There are spots
of darkness on your horizon, though they will disappear when you become
completely stupid. But a long and chequered path lies before you, and
of this I am glad. In the first place you will never gain a certain
person."

"Come, come! This is intolerable! You had better stop, you little
mischief-making wretch!" cried Varia. Gania had grown very pale; he
trembled, but said nothing.

Hippolyte paused, and looked at him intently and with great
gratification. He then turned his gaze upon Varia, bowed, and went out,
without adding another word.

Gania might justly complain of the hardness with which fate treated him.
Varia dared not speak to him for a long while, as he strode past her,
backwards and forwards. At last he went and stood at the window, looking
out, with his back turned towards her. There was a fearful row going on
upstairs again.

"Are you off?" said Gania, suddenly, remarking that she had risen and
was about to leave the room. "Wait a moment--look at this."

He approached the table and laid a small sheet of paper before her. It
looked like a little note.

"Good heavens!" cried Varia, raising her hands.

This was the note:

"GAVRILA ARDOLIONOVITCH,--persuaded of your kindness of heart, I have
determined to ask your advice on a matter of great importance to myself.
I should like to meet you tomorrow morning at seven o'clock by the green
bench in the park. It is not far from our house. Varvara Ardalionovna,
who must accompany you, knows the place well.

"A. E."

"What on earth is one to make of a girl like that?" said Varia.

Gania, little as he felt inclined for swagger at this moment, could
not avoid showing his triumph, especially just after such humiliating
remarks as those of Hippolyte. A smile of self-satisfaction beamed on
his face, and Varia too was brimming over with delight.

"And this is the very day that they were to announce the engagement!
What will she do next?"

"What do you suppose she wants to talk about tomorrow?" asked Gania.

"Oh, THAT'S all the same! The chief thing is that she wants to see you
after six months' absence. Look here, Gania, this is a SERIOUS business.
Don't swagger again and lose the game--play carefully, but don't funk,
do you understand? As if she could possibly avoid seeing what I have
been working for all this last six months! And just imagine, I was there
this morning and not a word of this! I was there, you know, on the sly.
The old lady did not know, or she would have kicked me out. I ran some
risk for you, you see. I did so want to find out, at all hazards."

Here there was a frantic noise upstairs once more; several people seemed
to be rushing downstairs at once.

"Now, Gania," cried Varia, frightened, "we can't let him go out! We
can't afford to have a breath of scandal about the town at this moment.
Run after him and beg his pardon--quick."

But the father of the family was out in the road already. Colia was
carrying his bag for him; Nina Alexandrovna stood and cried on the
doorstep; she wanted to run after the general, but Ptitsin kept her
back.

"You will only excite him more," he said. "He has nowhere else to go
to--he'll be back here in half an hour. I've talked it all over with
Colia; let him play the fool a bit, it will do him good."

"What are you up to? Where are you off to? You've nowhere to go to, you
know," cried Gania, out of the window.

"Come back, father; the neighbours will hear!" cried Varia.

The general stopped, turned round, raised his hands and remarked: "My
curse be upon this house!"

"Which observation should always be made in as theatrical a tone as
possible," muttered Gania, shutting the window with a bang.

The neighbours undoubtedly did hear. Varia rushed out of the room.

No sooner had his sister left him alone, than Gania took the note out of
his pocket, kissed it, and pirouetted around.

III.

As a general rule, old General Ivolgin's paroxysms ended in smoke. He
had before this experienced fits of sudden fury, but not very often,
because he was really a man of peaceful and kindly disposition. He had
tried hundreds of times to overcome the dissolute habits which he had
contracted of late years. He would suddenly remember that he was "a
father," would be reconciled with his wife, and shed genuine tears.
His feeling for Nina Alexandrovna amounted almost to adoration; she had
pardoned so much in silence, and loved him still in spite of the state
of degradation into which he had fallen. But the general's struggles
with his own weakness never lasted very long. He was, in his way, an
impetuous man, and a quiet life of repentance in the bosom of his family
soon became insupportable to him. In the end he rebelled, and flew into
rages which he regretted, perhaps, even as he gave way to them, but
which were beyond his control. He picked quarrels with everyone,
began to hold forth eloquently, exacted unlimited respect, and at last
disappeared from the house, and sometimes did not return for a long
time. He had given up interfering in the affairs of his family for
two years now, and knew nothing about them but what he gathered from
hearsay.

But on this occasion there was something more serious than usual.
Everyone seemed to know something, but to be afraid to talk about it.

The general had turned up in the bosom of his family two or three days
before, but not, as usual, with the olive branch of peace in his hand,
not in the garb of penitence--in which he was usually clad on such
occasions--but, on the contrary, in an uncommonly bad temper. He had
arrived in a quarrelsome mood, pitching into everyone he came across,
and talking about all sorts and kinds of subjects in the most unexpected
manner, so that it was impossible to discover what it was that was
really putting him out. At moments he would be apparently quite bright
and happy; but as a rule he would sit moody and thoughtful. He would
abruptly commence to hold forth about the Epanchins, about Lebedeff, or
the prince, and equally abruptly would stop short and refuse to speak
another word, answering all further questions with a stupid smile,
unconscious that he was smiling, or that he had been asked a question.
The whole of the previous night he had spent tossing about and groaning,
and poor Nina Alexandrovna had been busy making cold compresses and warm
fomentations and so on, without being very clear how to apply them. He
had fallen asleep after a while, but not for long, and had awaked in
a state of violent hypochondria which had ended in his quarrel with
Hippolyte, and the solemn cursing of Ptitsin's establishment generally.
It was also observed during those two or three days that he was in a
state of morbid self-esteem, and was specially touchy on all points of
honour. Colia insisted, in discussing the matter with his mother, that
all this was but the outcome of abstinence from drink, or perhaps of
pining after Lebedeff, with whom up to this time the general had been
upon terms of the greatest friendship; but with whom, for some reason
or other, he had quarrelled a few days since, parting from him in great
wrath. There had also been a scene with the prince. Colia had asked an
explanation of the latter, but had been forced to conclude that he was
not told the whole truth.

If Hippolyte and Nina Alexandrovna had, as Gania suspected, had some
special conversation about the general's actions, it was strange that
the malicious youth, whom Gania had called a scandal-monger to his face,
had not allowed himself a similar satisfaction with Colia.

The fact is that probably Hippolyte was not quite so black as Gania
painted him; and it was hardly likely that he had informed Nina
Alexandrovna of certain events, of which we know, for the mere pleasure
of giving her pain. We must never forget that human motives are
generally far more complicated than we are apt to suppose, and that we
can very rarely accurately describe the motives of another. It is much
better for the writer, as a rule, to content himself with the bare
statement of events; and we shall take this line with regard to the
catastrophe recorded above, and shall state the remaining events
connected with the general's trouble shortly, because we feel that
we have already given to this secondary character in our story more
attention than we originally intended.

The course of events had marched in the following order. When Lebedeff
returned, in company with the general, after their expedition to town a
few days since, for the purpose of investigation, he brought the prince
no information whatever. If the latter had not himself been occupied
with other thoughts and impressions at the time, he must have observed
that Lebedeff not only was very uncommunicative, but even appeared
anxious to avoid him.

When the prince did give the matter a little attention, he recalled
the fact that during these days he had always found Lebedeff to be in
radiantly good spirits, when they happened to meet; and further, that
the general and Lebedeff were always together. The two friends did not
seem ever to be parted for a moment.

Occasionally the prince heard loud talking and laughing upstairs, and
once he detected the sound of a jolly soldier's song going on above, and
recognized the unmistakable bass of the general's voice. But the sudden
outbreak of song did not last; and for an hour afterwards the animated
sound of apparently drunken conversation continued to be heard from
above. At length there was the clearest evidence of a grand mutual
embracing, and someone burst into tears. Shortly after this, however,
there was a violent but short-lived quarrel, with loud talking on both
sides.

All these days Colia had been in a state of great mental preoccupation.
Muishkin was usually out all day, and only came home late at night. On
his return he was invariably informed that Colia had been looking for
him. However, when they did meet, Colia never had anything particular to
tell him, excepting that he was highly dissatisfied with the general and
his present condition of mind and behaviour.

"They drag each other about the place," he said, "and get drunk together
at the pub close by here, and quarrel in the street on the way home, and
embrace one another after it, and don't seem to part for a moment."

When the prince pointed out that there was nothing new about that, for
that they had always behaved in this manner together, Colia did not know
what to say; in fact he could not explain what it was that specially
worried him, just now, about his father.

On the morning following the bacchanalian songs and quarrels recorded
above, as the prince stepped out of the house at about eleven o'clock,
the general suddenly appeared before him, much agitated.

"I have long sought the honour and opportunity of meeting
you--much-esteemed Lef Nicolaievitch," he murmured, pressing the
prince's hand very hard, almost painfully so; "long--very long."

The prince begged him to step in and sit down.

"No--I will not sit down,--I am keeping you, I see,--another time!--I
think I may be permitted to congratulate you upon the realization of
your heart's best wishes, is it not so?"

"What best wishes?"

The prince blushed. He thought, as so many in his position do, that
nobody had seen, heard, noticed, or understood anything.

"Oh--be easy, sir, be easy! I shall not wound your tenderest feelings.
I've been through it all myself, and I know well how unpleasant it is
when an outsider sticks his nose in where he is not wanted. I experience
this every morning. I came to speak to you about another matter, though,
an important matter. A very important matter, prince."

The latter requested him to take a seat once more, and sat down himself.

"Well--just for one second, then. The fact is, I came for advice. Of
course I live now without any very practical objects in life; but,
being full of self-respect, in which quality the ordinary Russian is so
deficient as a rule, and of activity, I am desirous, in a word, prince,
of placing myself and my wife and children in a position of--in fact, I
want advice."

The prince commended his aspirations with warmth.

"Quite so--quite so! But this is all mere nonsense. I came here to speak
of something quite different, something very important, prince. And
I have determined to come to you as to a man in whose sincerity and
nobility of feeling I can trust like--like--are you surprised at my
words, prince?"

The prince was watching his guest, if not with much surprise, at all
events with great attention and curiosity.

The old man was very pale; every now and then his lips trembled, and his
hands seemed unable to rest quietly, but continually moved from place to
place. He had twice already jumped up from his chair and sat down again
without being in the least aware of it. He would take up a hook from
the table and open it--talking all the while,--look at the heading of a
chapter, shut it and put it back again, seizing another immediately, but
holding it unopened in his hand, and waving it in the air as he spoke.

"But enough!" he cried, suddenly. "I see I have been boring you with
my--"

"Not in the least--not in the least, I assure you. On the contrary, I am
listening most attentively, and am anxious to guess-"

"Prince, I wish to place myself in a respectable position--I wish to
esteem myself--and to--"

"My dear sir, a man of such noble aspirations is worthy of all esteem by
virtue of those aspirations alone."

The prince brought out his "copy-book sentence" in the firm belief that
it would produce a good effect. He felt instinctively that some such
well-sounding humbug, brought out at the proper moment, would soothe the
old man's feelings, and would be specially acceptable to such a man in
such a position. At all hazards, his guest must be despatched with heart
relieved and spirit comforted; that was the problem before the prince at
this moment.

The phrase flattered the general, touched him, and pleased him mightily.
He immediately changed his tone, and started off on a long and solemn
explanation. But listen as he would, the prince could make neither head
nor tail of it.

The general spoke hotly and quickly for ten minutes; he spoke as though
his words could not keep pace with his crowding thoughts. Tears stood
in his eyes, and yet his speech was nothing but a collection of
disconnected sentences, without beginning and without end--a string of
unexpected words and unexpected sentiments--colliding with one another,
and jumping over one another, as they burst from his lips.

"Enough!" he concluded at last, "you understand me, and that is the
great thing. A heart like yours cannot help understanding the sufferings
of another. Prince, you are the ideal of generosity; what are other men
beside yourself? But you are young--accept my blessing! My
principal object is to beg you to fix an hour for a most important
conversation--that is my great hope, prince. My heart needs but a little
friendship and sympathy, and yet I cannot always find means to satisfy
it."

"But why not now? I am ready to listen, and--"

"No, no--prince, not now! Now is a dream! And it is too, too important!
It is to be the hour of Fate to me--MY OWN hour. Our interview is not
to be broken in upon by every chance comer, every impertinent guest--and
there are plenty of such stupid, impertinent fellows"--(he bent over and
whispered mysteriously, with a funny, frightened look on his face)--"who
are unworthy to tie your shoe, prince. I don't say MINE, mind--you will
understand me, prince. Only YOU understand me, prince--no one else.
HE doesn't understand me, he is absolutely--ABSOLUTELY unable to
sympathize. The first qualification for understanding another is Heart."

The prince was rather alarmed at all this, and was obliged to end by
appointing the same hour of the following day for the interview desired.
The general left him much comforted and far less agitated than when he
had arrived.

At seven in the evening, the prince sent to request Lebedeff to pay
him a visit. Lebedeff came at once, and "esteemed it an honour," as he
observed, the instant he entered the room. He acted as though there
had never been the slightest suspicion of the fact that he had
systematically avoided the prince for the last three days.

He sat down on the edge of his chair, smiling and making faces,
and rubbing his hands, and looking as though he were in delighted
expectation of hearing some important communication, which had been long
guessed by all.

The prince was instantly covered with confusion; for it appeared to be
plain that everyone expected something of him--that everyone looked at
him as though anxious to congratulate him, and greeted him with hints,
and smiles, and knowing looks.

Keller, for instance, had run into the house three times of late, "just
for a moment," and each time with the air of desiring to offer his
congratulations. Colia, too, in spite of his melancholy, had once
or twice begun sentences in much the same strain of suggestion or
insinuation.

The prince, however, immediately began, with some show of annoyance, to
question Lebedeff categorically, as to the general's present condition,
and his opinion thereon. He described the morning's interview in a few
words.

"Everyone has his worries, prince, especially in these strange and
troublous times of ours," Lebedeff replied, drily, and with the air of a
man disappointed of his reasonable expectations.

"Dear me, what a philosopher you are!" laughed the prince.

"Philosophy is necessary, sir--very necessary--in our day. It is too
much neglected. As for me, much esteemed prince, I am sensible of having
experienced the honour of your confidence in a certain matter up to
a certain point, but never beyond that point. I do not for a moment
complain--"

"Lebedeff, you seem to be angry for some reason!" said the prince.

"Not the least bit in the world, esteemed and revered prince! Not the
least bit in the world!" cried Lebedeff, solemnly, with his hand upon
his heart. "On the contrary, I am too painfully aware that neither by my
position in the world, nor by my gifts of intellect and heart, nor by
my riches, nor by any former conduct of mine, have I in any way deserved
your confidence, which is far above my highest aspirations and hopes.
Oh no, prince; I may serve you, but only as your humble slave! I am not
angry, oh no! Not angry; pained perhaps, but nothing more.

"My dear Lebedeff, I--"

"Oh, nothing more, nothing more! I was saying to myself but now... 'I am
quite unworthy of friendly relations with him,' say I; 'but perhaps as
landlord of this house I may, at some future date, in his good time,
receive information as to certain imminent and much to be desired
changes--'"

So saying Lebedeff fixed the prince with his sharp little eyes, still in
hope that he would get his curiosity satisfied.

The prince looked back at him in amazement.

"I don't understand what you are driving at!" he cried, almost angrily,
"and, and--what an intriguer you are, Lebedeff!" he added, bursting into
a fit of genuine laughter.

Lebedeff followed suit at once, and it was clear from his radiant face
that he considered his prospects of satisfaction immensely improved.

"And do you know," the prince continued, "I am amazed at your naive
ways, Lebedeff! Don't be angry with me--not only yours, everybody else's
also! You are waiting to hear something from me at this very moment with
such simplicity that I declare I feel quite ashamed of myself for having
nothing whatever to tell you. I swear to you solemnly, that there is
nothing to tell. There! Can you take that in?" The prince laughed again.

Lebedeff assumed an air of dignity. It was true enough that he was
sometimes naive to a degree in his curiosity; but he was also an
excessively cunning gentleman, and the prince was almost converting
him into an enemy by his repeated rebuffs. The prince did not snub
Lebedeff's curiosity, however, because he felt any contempt for him; but
simply because the subject was too delicate to talk about. Only a few
days before he had looked upon his own dreams almost as crimes. But
Lebedeff considered the refusal as caused by personal dislike to
himself, and was hurt accordingly. Indeed, there was at this moment a
piece of news, most interesting to the prince, which Lebedeff knew
and even had wished to tell him, but which he now kept obstinately to
himself.

"And what can I do for you, esteemed prince? Since I am told you sent
for me just now," he said, after a few moments' silence.

"Oh, it was about the general," began the prince, waking abruptly from
the fit of musing which he too had indulged in "and-and about the theft
you told me of."

"That is--er--about--what theft?"

"Oh come! just as if you didn't understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch! What
are you up to? I can't make you out! The money, the money, sir! The four
hundred roubles that you lost that day. You came and told me about
it one morning, and then went off to Petersburg. There, NOW do you
understand?"

"Oh--h--h! You mean the four hundred roubles!" said Lebedeff, dragging
the words out, just as though it had only just dawned upon him what
the prince was talking about. "Thanks very much, prince, for your kind
interest--you do me too much honour. I found the money, long ago!"

"You found it? Thank God for that!"

"Your exclamation proves the generous sympathy of your nature, prince;
for four hundred roubles--to a struggling family man like myself--is no
small matter!"

"I didn't mean that; at least, of course, I'm glad for your sake, too,"
added the prince, correcting himself, "but--how did you find it?"

"Very simply indeed! I found it under the chair upon which my coat had
hung; so that it is clear the purse simply fell out of the pocket and on
to the floor!"

"Under the chair? Impossible! Why, you told me yourself that you had
searched every corner of the room? How could you not have looked in the
most likely place of all?"

"Of course I looked there,--of course I did! Very much so! I looked and
scrambled about, and felt for it, and wouldn't believe it was not there,
and looked again and again. It is always so in such cases. One longs and
expects to find a lost article; one sees it is not there, and the place
is as bare as one's palm; and yet one returns and looks again and again,
fifteen or twenty times, likely enough!"

"Oh, quite so, of course. But how was it in your case?--I don't quite
understand," said the bewildered prince. "You say it wasn't there at
first, and that you searched the place thoroughly, and yet it turned up
on that very spot!"

"Yes, sir--on that very spot." The prince gazed strangely at Lebedeff.
"And the general?" he asked, abruptly.

"The--the general? How do you mean, the general?" said Lebedeff,
dubiously, as though he had not taken in the drift of the prince's
remark.

"Oh, good heavens! I mean, what did the general say when the purse
turned up under the chair? You and he had searched for it together
there, hadn't you?"

"Quite so--together! But the second time I thought better to say nothing
about finding it. I found it alone."

"But--why in the world--and the money? Was it all there?"

"I opened the purse and counted it myself; right to a single rouble."

"I think you might have come and told me," said the prince,
thoughtfully.

"Oh--I didn't like to disturb you, prince, in the midst of your private
and doubtless most interesting personal reflections. Besides, I wanted
to appear, myself, to have found nothing. I took the purse, and opened
it, and counted the money, and shut it and put it down again under the
chair."

"What in the world for?"

"Oh, just out of curiosity," said Lebedeff, rubbing his hands and
sniggering.

"What, it's still there then, is it? Ever since the day before
yesterday?"

"Oh no! You see, I was half in hopes the general might find it. Because
if I found it, why should not he too observe an object lying before his
very eyes? I moved the chair several times so as to expose the purse
to view, but the general never saw it. He is very absent just now,
evidently. He talks and laughs and tells stories, and suddenly flies
into a rage with me, goodness knows why."

"Well, but--have you taken the purse away now?"

"No, it disappeared from under the chair in the night."

"Where is it now, then?"

"Here," laughed Lebedeff, at last, rising to his full height and looking
pleasantly at the prince, "here, in the lining of my coat. Look, you can
feel it for yourself, if you like!"

Sure enough there was something sticking out of the front of the
coat--something large. It certainly felt as though it might well be the
purse fallen through a hole in the pocket into the lining.

"I took it out and had a look at it; it's all right. I've let it slip
back into the lining now, as you see, and so I have been walking about
ever since yesterday morning; it knocks against my legs when I walk
along."

"H'm! and you take no notice of it?"

"Quite so, I take no notice of it. Ha, ha! and think of this, prince,
my pockets are always strong and whole, and yet, here in one night, is a
huge hole. I know the phenomenon is unworthy of your notice; but such is
the case. I examined the hole, and I declare it actually looks as though
it had been made with a pen-knife, a most improbable contingency."

"And--and--the general?"

"Ah, very angry all day, sir; all yesterday and all today. He shows
decided bacchanalian predilections at one time, and at another is
tearful and sensitive, but at any moment he is liable to paroxysms of
such rage that I assure you, prince, I am quite alarmed. I am not
a military man, you know. Yesterday we were sitting together in
the tavern, and the lining of my coat was--quite accidentally, of
course--sticking out right in front. The general squinted at it, and
flew into a rage. He never looks me quite in the face now, unless he is
very drunk or maudlin; but yesterday he looked at me in such a way that
a shiver went all down my back. I intend to find the purse tomorrow; but
till then I am going to have another night of it with him."

"What's the good of tormenting him like this?" cried the prince.

"I don't torment him, prince, I don't indeed!" cried Lebedeff, hotly. "I
love him, my dear sir, I esteem him; and believe it or not, I love him
all the better for this business, yes--and value him more."

Lebedeff said this so seriously that the prince quite lost his temper
with him.

"Nonsense! love him and torment him so! Why, by the very fact that he
put the purse prominently before you, first under the chair and then
in your lining, he shows that he does not wish to deceive you, but is
anxious to beg your forgiveness in this artless way. Do you hear? He is
asking your pardon. He confides in the delicacy of your feelings, and
in your friendship for him. And you can allow yourself to humiliate so
thoroughly honest a man!"

"Thoroughly honest, quite so, prince, thoroughly honest!" said Lebedeff,
with flashing eyes. "And only you, prince, could have found so very
appropriate an expression. I honour you for it, prince. Very well,
that's settled; I shall find the purse now and not tomorrow. Here, I
find it and take it out before your eyes! And the money is all right.
Take it, prince, and keep it till tomorrow, will you? Tomorrow or next
day I'll take it back again. I think, prince, that the night after
its disappearance it was buried under a bush in the garden. So I
believe--what do you think of that?"

"Well, take care you don't tell him to his face that you have found the
purse. Simply let him see that it is no longer in the lining of your
coat, and form his own conclusions."

"Do you think so? Had I not just better tell him I have found it, and
pretend I never guessed where it was?"

"No, I don't think so," said the prince, thoughtfully; "it's too late
for that--that would be dangerous now. No, no! Better say nothing about
it. Be nice with him, you know, but don't show him--oh, YOU know well
enough--"

"I know, prince, of course I know, but I'm afraid I shall not carry
it out; for to do so one needs a heart like your own. He is so very
irritable just now, and so proud. At one moment he will embrace me,
and the next he flies out at me and sneers at me, and then I stick the
lining forward on purpose. Well, au revoir, prince, I see I am keeping
you, and boring you, too, interfering with your most interesting private
reflections."

"Now, do be careful! Secrecy, as before!"

"Oh, silence isn't the word! Softly, softly!"

But in spite of this conclusion to the episode, the prince remained as
puzzled as ever, if not more so. He awaited next morning's interview
with the general most impatiently.

IV.

THE time appointed was twelve o'clock, and the prince, returning home
unexpectedly late, found the general waiting for him. At the first
glance, he saw that the latter was displeased, perhaps because he had
been kept waiting. The prince apologized, and quickly took a seat. He
seemed strangely timid before the general this morning, for some reason,
and felt as though his visitor were some piece of china which he was
afraid of breaking.

On scrutinizing him, the prince soon saw that the general was quite a
different man from what he had been the day before; he looked like one
who had come to some momentous resolve. His calmness, however, was more
apparent than real. He was courteous, but there was a suggestion of
injured innocence in his manner.

"I've brought your book back," he began, indicating a book lying on the
table. "Much obliged to you for lending it to me."

"Ah, yes. Well, did you read it, general? It's curious, isn't it?" said
the prince, delighted to be able to open up conversation upon an outside
subject.

"Curious enough, yes, but crude, and of course dreadful nonsense;
probably the man lies in every other sentence."

The general spoke with considerable confidence, and dragged his words
out with a conceited drawl.

"Oh, but it's only the simple tale of an old soldier who saw the French
enter Moscow. Some of his remarks were wonderfully interesting. Remarks
of an eye-witness are always valuable, whoever he be, don't you think so?"

"Had I been the publisher I should not have printed it. As to the
evidence of eye-witnesses, in these days people prefer impudent lies to
the stories of men of worth and long service. I know of some notes of
the year 1812, which--I have determined, prince, to leave this house,
Mr. Lebedeff's house."

The general looked significantly at his host.

"Of course you have your own lodging at Pavlofsk at--at your daughter's
house," began the prince, quite at a loss what to say. He suddenly
recollected that the general had come for advice on a most important
matter, affecting his destiny.

"At my wife's; in other words, at my own place, my daughter's house."

"I beg your pardon, I--"

"I leave Lebedeff's house, my dear prince, because I have quarrelled
with this person. I broke with him last night, and am very sorry that I
did not do so before. I expect respect, prince, even from those to whom
I give my heart, so to speak. Prince, I have often given away my heart,
and am nearly always deceived. This person was quite unworthy of the
gift."

"There is much that might be improved in him," said the prince,
moderately, "but he has some qualities which--though amid them one
cannot but discern a cunning nature--reveal what is often a diverting
intellect."

The prince's tone was so natural and respectful that the general could
not possibly suspect him of any insincerity.

"Oh, that he possesses good traits, I was the first to show, when I very
nearly made him a present of my friendship. I am not dependent upon his
hospitality, and upon his house; I have my own family. I do not attempt
to justify my own weakness. I have drunk with this man, and perhaps I
deplore the fact now, but I did not take him up for the sake of drink
alone (excuse the crudeness of the expression, prince); I did not make
friends with him for that alone. I was attracted by his good qualities;
but when the fellow declares that he was a child in 1812, and had his
left leg cut off, and buried in the Vagarkoff cemetery, in Moscow,
such a cock-and-bull story amounts to disrespect, my dear sir, to--to
impudent exaggeration."

"Oh, he was very likely joking; he said it for fun."

"I quite understand you. You mean that an innocent lie for the sake of a
good joke is harmless, and does not offend the human heart. Some people
lie, if you like to put it so, out of pure friendship, in order to amuse
their fellows; but when a man makes use of extravagance in order to show
his disrespect and to make clear how the intimacy bores him, it is time
for a man of honour to break off the said intimacy., and to teach the
offender his place."

The general flushed with indignation as he spoke.

"Oh, but Lebedeff cannot have been in Moscow in 1812. He is much too
young; it is all nonsense."

"Very well, but even if we admit that he was alive in 1812, can one
believe that a French chasseur pointed a cannon at him for a lark, and
shot his left leg off? He says he picked his own leg up and took it away
and buried it in the cemetery. He swore he had a stone put up over
it with the inscription: 'Here lies the leg of Collegiate Secretary
Lebedeff,' and on the other side, 'Rest, beloved ashes, till the morn of
joy,' and that he has a service read over it every year (which is simply
sacrilege), and goes to Moscow once a year on purpose. He invites me to
Moscow in order to prove his assertion, and show me his leg's tomb, and
the very cannon that shot him; he says it's the eleventh from the
gate of the Kremlin, an old-fashioned falconet taken from the French
afterwards."

"And, meanwhile both his legs are still on his body," said the prince,
laughing. "I assure you, it is only an innocent joke, and you need not
be angry about it."

"Excuse me--wait a minute--he says that the leg we see is a wooden one,
made by Tchernosvitoff."

"They do say one can dance with those!"

"Quite so, quite so; and he swears that his wife never found out that
one of his legs was wooden all the while they were married. When I
showed him the ridiculousness of all this, he said, 'Well, if you were
one of Napoleon's pages in 1812, you might let me bury my leg in the
Moscow cemetery.'

"Why, did you say--" began the prince, and paused in confusion.

The general gazed at his host disdainfully.

"Oh, go on," he said, "finish your sentence, by all means. Say how odd
it appears to you that a man fallen to such a depth of humiliation as
I, can ever have been the actual eye-witness of great events. Go on, I
don't mind! Has he found time to tell you scandal about me?"

"No, I've heard nothing of this from Lebedeff, if you mean Lebedeff."

"H'm; I thought differently. You see, we were talking over this period
of history. I was criticizing a current report of something which then
happened, and having been myself an eye-witness of the occurrence--you
are smiling, prince--you are looking at my face as if--"

"Oh no! not at all--I--"

"I am rather young-looking, I know; but I am actually older than I
appear to be. I was ten or eleven in the year 1812. I don't know my age
exactly, but it has always been a weakness of mine to make it out less
than it really is.

"I assure you, general, I do not in the least doubt your statement. One
of our living autobiographers states that when he was a small baby in
Moscow in 1812 the French soldiers fed him with bread."

"Well, there you see!" said the general, condescendingly. "There is
nothing whatever unusual about my tale. Truth very often appears to
be impossible. I was a page--it sounds strange, I dare say. Had I been
fifteen years old I should probably have been terribly frightened
when the French arrived, as my mother was (who had been too slow about
clearing out of Moscow); but as I was only just ten I was not in the
least alarmed, and rushed through the crowd to the very door of the
palace when Napoleon alighted from his horse."

"Undoubtedly, at ten years old you would not have felt the sense of
fear, as you say," blurted out the prince, horribly uncomfortable in the
sensation that he was just about to blush.

"Of course; and it all happened so easily and naturally. And yet, were
a novelist to describe the episode, he would put in all kinds of
impossible and incredible details."

"Oh," cried the prince, "I have often thought that! Why, I know of a
murder, for the sake of a watch. It's in all the papers now. But if
some writer had invented it, all the critics would have jumped down his
throat and said the thing was too improbable for anything. And yet you
read it in the paper, and you can't help thinking that out of these
strange disclosures is to be gained the full knowledge of Russian life
and character. You said that well, general; it is so true," concluded
the prince, warmly, delighted to have found a refuge from the fiery
blushes which had covered his face.

"Yes, it's quite true, isn't it?" cried the general, his eyes sparkling
with gratification. "A small boy, a child, would naturally realize no
danger; he would shove his way through the crowds to see the shine and
glitter of the uniforms, and especially the great man of whom everyone
was speaking, for at that time all the world had been talking of no one
but this man for some years past. The world was full of his name; I--so
to speak--drew it in with my mother's milk. Napoleon, passing a couple
of paces from me, caught sight of me accidentally. I was very well
dressed, and being all alone, in that crowd, as you will easily
imagine...

"Oh, of course! Naturally the sight impressed him, and proved to him
that not ALL the aristocracy had left Moscow; that at least some nobles
and their children had remained behind."

Just so just so! He wanted to win over the aristocracy! When his eagle
eye fell on me, mine probably flashed back in response.' Voila un garcon
bien eveille! Qui est ton pere?' I immediately replied, almost panting
with excitement, 'A general, who died on the battle-fields of his
country! "Le fils d'un boyard et d'un brave, pardessus le marche. J'aime
les boyards. M'aimes-tu, petit?' To this keen question I replied as
keenly, 'The Russian heart can recognize a great man even in the bitter
enemy of his country.' At least, I don't remember the exact words,
you know, but the idea was as I say. Napoleon was struck; he thought
a minute and then said to his suite: 'I like that boy's pride; if all
Russians think like this child', then he didn't finish, but went on and
entered the palace. I instantly mixed with his suite, and followed him.
I was already in high favour. I remember when he came into the first
hall, the emperor stopped before a portrait of the Empress Katherine,
and after a thoughtful glance remarked, 'That was a great woman,' and
passed on.

"Well, in a couple of days I was known all over the palace and the
Kremlin as 'le petit boyard.' I only went home to sleep. They were
nearly out of their minds about me at home. A couple of days after this,
Napoleon's page, De Bazancour, died; he had not been able to stand the
trials of the campaign. Napoleon remembered me; I was taken away without
explanation; the dead page's uniform was tried on me, and when I was
taken before the emperor, dressed in it, he nodded his head to me, and I
was told that I was appointed to the vacant post of page.

"Well, I was glad enough, for I had long felt the greatest sympathy for
this man; and then the pretty uniform and all that--only a child, you
know--and so on. It was a dark green dress coat with gold buttons--red
facings, white trousers, and a white silk waistcoat--silk stockings,
shoes with buckles, and top-boots if I were riding out with his majesty
or with the suite.

"Though the position of all of us at that time was not particularly
brilliant, and the poverty was dreadful all round, yet the etiquette at
court was strictly preserved, and the more strictly in proportion to the
growth of the forebodings of disaster."

"Quite so, quite so, of course!" murmured the poor prince, who didn't
know where to look. "Your memoirs would be most interesting."

The general was, of course, repeating what he had told Lebedeff the
night before, and thus brought it out glibly enough, but here he looked
suspiciously at the prince out of the corners of his eyes.

"My memoirs!" he began, with redoubled pride and dignity. "Write my
memoirs? The idea has not tempted me. And yet, if you please, my memoirs
have long been written, but they shall not see the light until dust
returns to dust. Then, I doubt not, they will be translated into all
languages, not of course on account of their actual literary merit, but
because of the great events of which I was the actual witness, though
but a child at the time. As a child, I was able to penetrate into the
secrecy of the great man's private room. At nights I have heard the
groans and wailings of this 'giant in distress.' He could feel no shame
in weeping before such a mere child as I was, though I understood even
then that the reason for his suffering was the silence of the Emperor
Alexander."

"Yes, of course; he had written letters to the latter with proposals of
peace, had he not?" put in the prince.

"We did not know the details of his proposals, but he wrote letter after
letter, all day and every day. He was dreadfully agitated. Sometimes at
night I would throw myself upon his breast with tears (Oh, how I
loved that man!). 'Ask forgiveness, Oh, ask forgiveness of the Emperor
Alexander!' I would cry. I should have said, of course, 'Make peace
with Alexander,' but as a child I expressed my idea in the naive way
recorded. 'Oh, my child,' he would say (he loved to talk to me and
seemed to forget my tender years), 'Oh, my child, I am ready to kiss
Alexander's feet, but I hate and abominate the King of Prussia and the
Austrian Emperor, and--and--but you know nothing of politics, my child.'
He would pull up, remembering whom he was speaking to, but his eyes
would sparkle for a long while after this. Well now, if I were to
describe all this, and I have seen greater events than these, all these
critical gentlemen of the press and political parties--Oh, no thanks!
I'm their very humble servant, but no thanks!"

"Quite so--parties--you are very right," said the prince. "I was reading
a book about Napoleon and the Waterloo campaign only the other day, by
Charasse, in which the author does not attempt to conceal his joy at
Napoleon's discomfiture at every page. Well now, I don't like that;
it smells of 'party,' you know. You are quite right. And were you much
occupied with your service under Napoleon?"

The general was in ecstasies, for the prince's remarks, made, as they
evidently were, in all seriousness and simplicity, quite dissipated the
last relics of his suspicion.

"I know Charasse's book! Oh! I was so angry with his work! I wrote to
him and said--I forget what, at this moment. You ask whether I was very
busy under the Emperor? Oh no! I was called 'page,' but hardly took my
duty seriously. Besides, Napoleon very soon lost hope of conciliating
the Russians, and he would have forgotten all about me had he not loved
me--for personal reasons--I don't mind saying so now. My heart was
greatly drawn to him, too. My duties were light. I merely had to be at
the palace occasionally to escort the Emperor out riding, and that
was about all. I rode very fairly well. He used to have a ride before
dinner, and his suite on those occasions were generally Davoust, myself,
and Roustan."

"Constant?" said the prince, suddenly, and quite involuntarily.

"No; Constant was away then, taking a letter to the Empress Josephine.
Instead of him there were always a couple of orderlies--and that was
all, excepting, of course, the generals and marshals whom Napoleon
always took with him for the inspection of various localities, and
for the sake of consultation generally. I remember there was
one--Davoust--nearly always with him--a big man with spectacles. They
used to argue and quarrel sometimes. Once they were in the Emperor's
study together--just those two and myself--I was unobserved--and
they argued, and the Emperor seemed to be agreeing to something under
protest. Suddenly his eye fell on me and an idea seemed to flash across
him.

"'Child,' he said, abruptly. 'If I were to recognize the Russian
orthodox religion and emancipate the serfs, do you think Russia would
come over to me?'"

"'Never!' I cried, indignantly."

"The Emperor was much struck."

"'In the flashing eyes of this patriotic child I read and accept the
fiat of the Russian people. Enough, Davoust, it is mere phantasy on our
part. Come, let's hear your other project.'"

"'Yes, but that was a great idea," said the prince, clearly interested.
"You ascribe it to Davoust, do you?"

"Well, at all events, they were consulting together at the time. Of
course it was the idea of an eagle, and must have originated with
Napoleon; but the other project was good too--it was the 'Conseil du
lion!' as Napoleon called it. This project consisted in a proposal
to occupy the Kremlin with the whole army; to arm and fortify it
scientifically, to kill as many horses as could be got, and salt their
flesh, and spend the winter there; and in spring to fight their way out.
Napoleon liked the idea--it attracted him. We rode round the Kremlin
walls every day, and Napoleon used to give orders where they were to be
patched, where built up, where pulled down and so on. All was decided at
last. They were alone together--those two and myself.

"Napoleon was walking up and down with folded arms. I could not take my
eyes off his face--my heart beat loudly and painfully.

"'I'm off,' said Davoust. 'Where to?' asked Napoleon.

"'To salt horse-flesh,' said Davoust. Napoleon shuddered--his fate was
being decided.

"'Child,' he addressed me suddenly, 'what do you think of our plan?' Of
course he only applied to me as a sort of toss-up, you know. I turned to
Davoust and addressed my reply to him. I said, as though inspired:

"'Escape, general! Go home!--'

"The project was abandoned; Davoust shrugged his shoulders and went out,
whispering to himself--'Bah, il devient superstitieux!' Next morning the
order to retreat was given."

"All this is most interesting," said the prince, very softly, "if it
really was so--that is, I mean--" he hastened to correct himself.

"Oh, my dear prince," cried the general, who was now so intoxicated with
his own narrative that he probably could not have pulled up at the most
patent indiscretion.

"You say, if it really was so!' There was more--much more, I assure
you! These are merely a few little political acts. I tell you I was the
eye-witness of the nightly sorrow and groanings of the great man, and
of that no one can speak but myself. Towards the end he wept no more,
though he continued to emit an occasional groan; but his face grew more
overcast day by day, as though Eternity were wrapping its gloomy mantle
about him. Occasionally we passed whole hours of silence together at
night, Roustan snoring in the next room--that fellow slept like a pig.
'But he's loyal to me and my dynasty,' said Napoleon of him.

"Sometimes it was very painful to me, and once he caught me with tears
in my eyes. He looked at me kindly. 'You are sorry for me,' he said,
'you, my child, and perhaps one other child--my son, the King of
Rome--may grieve for me. All the rest hate me; and my brothers are the
first to betray me in misfortune.' I sobbed and threw myself into his
arms. He could not resist me--he burst into tears, and our tears mingled
as we folded each other in a close embrace.

"'Write, oh, write a letter to the Empress Josephine!' I cried, sobbing.
Napoleon started, reflected, and said, 'You remind me of a third heart
which loves me. Thank you, my friend;' and then and there he sat down
and wrote that letter to Josephine, with which Constant was sent off
next day."

"You did a good action," said the prince, "for in the midst of his angry
feelings you insinuated a kind thought into his heart."

"Just so, prince, just so. How well you bring out that fact! Because
your own heart is good!" cried the ecstatic old gentleman, and,
strangely enough, real tears glistened in his eyes. "Yes, prince, it was
a wonderful spectacle. And, do you know, I all but went off to Paris,
and should assuredly have shared his solitary exile with him; but, alas,
our destinies were otherwise ordered! We parted, he to his island,
where I am sure he thought of the weeping child who had embraced him
so affectionately at parting in Moscow; and I was sent off to the cadet
corps, where I found nothing but roughness and harsh discipline. Alas,
my happy days were done!"

"'I do not wish to deprive your mother of you, and, therefore, I will
not ask you to go with me,' he said, the morning of his departure, 'but
I should like to do something for you.' He was mounting his horse as
he spoke. 'Write something in my sister's album for me,' I said rather
timidly, for he was in a state of great dejection at the moment. He
turned, called for a pen, took the album. 'How old is your sister?'
he asked, holding the pen in his hand. 'Three years old,' I said. 'Ah,
petite fille alors!' and he wrote in the album:

'Ne mentes jamais! NAPOLEON (votre ami sincere).'

"Such advice, and at such a moment, you must allow, prince, was--"

"Yes, quite so; very remarkable."

"This page of the album, framed in gold, hung on the wall of my sister's
drawing-room all her life, in the most conspicuous place, till the day
of her death; where it is now, I really don't know. Heavens! it's two
o'clock! _How_ I have kept you, prince! It is really most unpardonable of
me."

The general rose.

"Oh, not in the least," said the prince. "On the contrary, I have been
so much interested, I'm really very much obliged to you."

"Prince,", said the general, pressing his hand, and looking at him with
flashing eyes, and an expression as though he were under the influence
of a sudden thought which had come upon him with stunning force.
"Prince, you are so kind, so simple-minded, that sometimes I really
feel sorry for you! I gaze at you with a feeling of real affection. Oh,
Heaven bless you! May your life blossom and fructify in love. Mine is
over. Forgive me, forgive me!"

He left the room quickly, covering his face with his hands.

The prince could not doubt the sincerity of his agitation. He
understood, too, that the old man had left the room intoxicated with his
own success. The general belonged to that class of liars, who, in spite
of their transports of lying, invariably suspect that they are not
believed. On this occasion, when he recovered from his exaltation, he
would probably suspect Muishkin of pitying him, and feel insulted.

"Have I been acting rightly in allowing him to develop such vast
resources of imagination?" the prince asked himself. But his answer was
a fit of violent laughter which lasted ten whole minutes. He tried to
reproach himself for the laughing fit, but eventually concluded that he
needn't do so, since in spite of it he was truly sorry for the old man.
The same evening he received a strange letter, short but decided. The
general informed him that they must part for ever; that he was grateful,
but that even from him he could not accept "signs of sympathy which were
humiliating to the dignity of a man already miserable enough."

When the prince heard that the old man had gone to Nina Alexandrovna,
though, he felt almost easy on his account.

We have seen, however, that the general paid a visit to Lizabetha
Prokofievna and caused trouble there, the final upshot being that he
frightened Mrs. Epanchin, and angered her by bitter hints as to his son
Gania.

He had been turned out in disgrace, eventually, and this was the
cause of his bad night and quarrelsome day, which ended in his sudden
departure into the street in a condition approaching insanity, as
recorded before.

Colia did not understand the position. He tried severity with his
father, as they stood in the street after the latter had cursed the
household, hoping to bring him round that way.

"Well, where are we to go to now, father?" he asked. "You don't want
to go to the prince's; you have quarrelled with Lebedeff; you have no
money; I never have any; and here we are in the middle of the road, in a
nice sort of mess."

"Better to be of a mess than in a mess! I remember making a joke
something like that at the mess in eighteen hundred and forty--forty--I
forget. 'Where is my youth, where is my golden youth?' Who was it said
that, Colia?"

"It was Gogol, in Dead Souls, father," cried Colia, glancing at him in
some alarm.

"'Dead Souls,' yes, of course, dead. When I die, Colia, you must engrave
on my tomb:

"'Here lies a Dead Soul, Shame pursues me.'

"Who said that, Colia?"

"I don't know, father."

"There was no Eropegoff? Eroshka Eropegoff?" he cried, suddenly,
stopping in the road in a frenzy. "No Eropegoff! And my own son to say
it! Eropegoff was in the place of a brother to me for eleven months. I
fought a duel for him. He was married afterwards, and then killed on the
field of battle. The bullet struck the cross on my breast and glanced
off straight into his temple. 'I'll never forget you,' he cried, and
expired. I served my country well and honestly, Colia, but shame, shame
has pursued me! You and Nina will come to my grave, Colia; poor Nina,
I always used to call her Nina in the old days, and how she loved....
Nina, Nina, oh, Nina. What have I ever done to deserve your forgiveness
and long-suffering? Oh, Colia, your mother has an angelic spirit, an
angelic spirit, Colia!"

"I know that, father. Look here, dear old father, come back home! Let's
go back to mother. Look, she ran after us when we came out. What have
you stopped her for, just as though you didn't take in what I said? Why
are you crying, father?"

Poor Colia cried himself, and kissed the old man's hands

"You kiss my hands, MINE?"

"Yes, yes, yours, yours! What is there to surprise anyone in that? Come,
come, you mustn't go on like this, crying in the middle of the road; and
you a general too, a military man! Come, let's go back."

"God bless you, dear boy, for being respectful to a disgraced man. Yes,
to a poor disgraced old fellow, your father. You shall have such a son
yourself; le roi de Rome. Oh, curses on this house!"

"Come, come, what does all this mean?" cried Colia beside himself at
last. "What is it? What has happened to you? Why don't you wish to come
back home? Why have you gone out of your mind, like this?"

"I'll explain it, I'll explain all to you. Don't shout! You shall hear.
Le roi de Rome. Oh, I am sad, I am melancholy!

"'Nurse, where is your tomb?'"

"Who said that, Colia?"

"I don't know, I don't know who said it. Come home at once; come on!
I'll punch Gania's head myself, if you like--only come. Oh, where are
you off to again?" The general was dragging him away towards the door a
house near. He sat down on the step, still holding Colia by the hand.

"Bend down--bend down your ear. I'll tell you all--disgrace--bend down,
I'll tell you in your ear."

"What are you dreaming of?" said poor, frightened Colia, stooping down
towards the old man, all the same.

"Le roi de Rome," whispered the general, trembling all over.

"What? What DO you mean? What roi de Rome?"

"I-I," the general continued to whisper, clinging more and more
tightly to the boy's shoulder. "I--wish--to tell you--all--Maria--Maria
Petrovna--Su--Su--Su......."

Colia broke loose, seized his father by the shoulders, and stared into
his eyes with frenzied gaze. The old man had grown livid--his lips were
shaking, convulsions were passing over his features. Suddenly he leant
over and began to sink slowly into Colia's arms.

"He's got a stroke!" cried Colia, loudly, realizing what was the matter
at last.

V.

IN point of fact, Varia had rather exaggerated the certainty of her
news as to the prince's betrothal to Aglaya. Very likely, with the
perspicacity of her sex, she gave out as an accomplished fact what she
felt was pretty sure to become a fact in a few days. Perhaps she could
not resist the satisfaction of pouring one last drop of bitterness into
her brother Gania's cup, in spite of her love for him. At all events,
she had been unable to obtain any definite news from the Epanchin
girls--the most she could get out of them being hints and surmises, and
so on. Perhaps Aglaya's sisters had merely been pumping Varia for news
while pretending to impart information; or perhaps, again, they had been
unable to resist the feminine gratification of teasing a friend--for,
after all this time, they could scarcely have helped divining the aim of
her frequent visits.

On the other hand, the prince, although he had told Lebedeff,--as we
know, that nothing had happened, and that he had nothing to impart,--the
prince may have been in error. Something strange seemed to have
happened, without anything definite having actually happened. Varia had
guessed that with her true feminine instinct.

How or why it came about that everyone at the Epanchins' became imbued
with one conviction--that something very important had happened to
Aglaya, and that her fate was in process of settlement--it would be very
difficult to explain. But no sooner had this idea taken root, than all
at once declared that they had seen and observed it long ago; that they
had remarked it at the time of the "poor knight" joke, and even before,
though they had been unwilling to believe in such nonsense.

So said the sisters. Of course, Lizabetha Prokofievna had foreseen it
long before the rest; her "heart had been sore" for a long while,
she declared, and it was now so sore that she appeared to be quite
overwhelmed, and the very thought of the prince became distasteful to
her.

There was a question to be decided--most important, but most difficult;
so much so, that Mrs. Epanchin did not even see how to put it into
words. Would the prince do or not? Was all this good or bad? If good
(which might be the case, of course), WHY good? If bad (which was
hardly doubtful), WHEREIN, especially, bad? Even the general, the
paterfamilias, though astonished at first, suddenly declared that, "upon
his honour, he really believed he had fancied something of the kind,
after all. At first, it seemed a new idea, and then, somehow, it looked
as familiar as possible." His wife frowned him down there. This was
in the morning; but in the evening, alone with his wife, he had given
tongue again.

"Well, really, you know"--(silence)--"of course, you know all this is
very strange, if true, which I cannot deny; but"--(silence).--"But,
on the other hand, if one looks things in the face, you know--upon my
honour, the prince is a rare good fellow--and--and--and--well, his name,
you know--your family name--all this looks well, and perpetuates the
name and title and all that--which at this moment is not standing so
high as it might--from one point of view--don't you know? The world,
the world is the world, of course--and people will talk--and--and--the
prince has property, you know--if it is not very large--and then
he--he--" (Continued silence, and collapse of the general.)

Hearing these words from her husband, Lizabetha Prokofievna was driven
beside herself.

According to her opinion, the whole thing had been one huge,
fantastical, absurd, unpardonable mistake. "First of all, this prince is
an idiot, and, secondly, he is a fool--knows nothing of the world, and
has no place in it. Whom can he be shown to? Where can you take him to?
What will old Bielokonski say? We never thought of such a husband as
THAT for our Aglaya!"

Of course, the last argument was the chief one. The maternal heart
trembled with indignation to think of such an absurdity, although in
that heart there rose another voice, which said: "And WHY is not the
prince such a husband as you would have desired for Aglaya?" It was this
voice which annoyed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than anything else.

For some reason or other, the sisters liked the idea of the prince. They
did not even consider it very strange; in a word, they might be expected
at any moment to range themselves strongly on his side. But both of them
decided to say nothing either way. It had always been noticed in the
family that the stronger Mrs. Epanchin's opposition was to any project,
the nearer she was, in reality, to giving in.

Alexandra, however, found it difficult to keep absolute silence on
the subject. Long since holding, as she did, the post of "confidential
adviser to mamma," she was now perpetually called in council, and asked
her opinion, and especially her assistance, in order to recollect "how
on earth all this happened?" Why did no one see it? Why did no one say
anything about it? What did all that wretched "poor knight" joke mean?
Why was she, Lizabetha Prokofievna, driven to think, and foresee, and
worry for everybody, while they all sucked their thumbs, and counted the
crows in the garden, and did nothing? At first, Alexandra had been very
careful, and had merely replied that perhaps her father's remark was not
so far out: that, in the eyes of the world, probably the choice of the
prince as a husband for one of the Epanchin girls would be considered a
very wise one. Warming up, however, she added that the prince was by no
means a fool, and never had been; and that as to "place in the world,"
no one knew what the position of a respectable person in Russia would
imply in a few years--whether it would depend on successes in the
government service, on the old system, or what.

To all this her mother replied that Alexandra was a freethinker, and
that all this was due to that "cursed woman's rights question."

Half an hour after this conversation, she went off to town, and thence
to the Kammenny Ostrof, ["Stone Island," a suburb and park of St.
Petersburg] to see Princess Bielokonski, who had just arrived from
Moscow on a short visit. The princess was Aglaya's godmother.

"Old Bielokonski" listened to all the fevered and despairing lamentations
of Lizabetha Prokofievna without the least emotion; the tears of this
sorrowful mother did not evoke answering sighs--in fact, she laughed at
her. She was a dreadful old despot, this princess; she could not allow
equality in anything, not even in friendship of the oldest standing, and
she insisted on treating Mrs. Epanchin as her protegee, as she had been
thirty-five years ago. She could never put up with the independence and
energy of Lizabetha's character. She observed that, as usual, the whole
family had gone much too far ahead, and had converted a fly into an
elephant; that, so far as she had heard their story, she was persuaded
that nothing of any seriousness had occurred; that it would surely
be better to wait until something _did_ happen; that the prince, in
her opinion, was a very decent young fellow, though perhaps a little
eccentric, through illness, and not quite as weighty in the world as one
could wish. The worst feature was, she said, Nastasia Philipovna.

Lizabetha Prokofievna well understood that the old lady was angry at the
failure of Evgenie Pavlovitch--her own recommendation. She returned
home to Pavlofsk in a worse humour than when she left, and of course
everybody in the house suffered. She pitched into everyone, because, she
declared, they had 'gone mad.' Why were things always mismanaged in her
house? Why had everybody been in such a frantic hurry in this matter?
So far as she could see, nothing whatever had happened. Surely they had
better wait and see what was to happen, instead of making mountains out
of molehills.

And so the conclusion of the matter was that it would be far better to
take it quietly, and wait coolly to see what would turn up. But, alas!
peace did not reign for more than ten minutes. The first blow dealt to
its power was in certain news communicated to Lizabetha Prokofievna as
to events which bad happened during her trip to see the princess. (This
trip had taken place the day after that on which the prince had turned
up at the Epanchins at nearly one o'clock at night, thinking it was
nine.)

The sisters replied candidly and fully enough to their mother's
impatient questions on her return. They said, in the first place, that
nothing particular had happened since her departure; that the prince
had been, and that Aglaya had kept him waiting a long while before
she appeared--half an hour, at least; that she had then come in, and
immediately asked the prince to have a game of chess; that the prince
did not know the game, and Aglaya had beaten him easily; that she had
been in a wonderfully merry mood, and had laughed at the prince, and
chaffed him so unmercifully that one was quite sorry to see his wretched
expression.

She had then asked him to play cards--the game called "little fools."
At this game the tables were turned completely, for the prince had shown
himself a master at it. Aglaya had cheated and changed cards, and stolen
others, in the most bare-faced way, but, in spite of everything the
prince had beaten her hopelessly five times running, and she had been
left "little fool" each time.

Aglaya then lost her temper, and began to say such awful things to the
prince that he laughed no more, but grew dreadfully pale, especially
when she said that she should not remain in the house with him, and that
he ought to be ashamed of coming to their house at all, especially at
night, "AFTER ALL THAT HAD HAPPENED."

So saying, she had left the room, banging the door after her, and the
prince went off, looking as though he were on his way to a funeral, in
spite of all their attempts at consolation.

Suddenly, a quarter of an hour after the prince's departure, Aglaya had
rushed out of her room in such a hurry that she had not even wiped her
eyes, which were full of tears. She came back because Colia had brought
a hedgehog. Everybody came in to see the hedgehog. In answer to their
questions Colia explained that the hedgehog was not his, and that he had
left another boy, Kostia Lebedeff, waiting for him outside. Kostia was
too shy to come in, because he was carrying a hatchet; they had bought
the hedgehog and the hatchet from a peasant whom they had met on the
road. He had offered to sell them the hedgehog, and they had paid fifty
copecks for it; and the hatchet had so taken their fancy that they had
made up their minds to buy it of their own accord. On hearing this,
Aglaya urged Colia to sell her the hedgehog; she even called him "dear
Colia," in trying to coax him. He refused for a long time, but at last
he could hold out no more, and went to fetch Kostia Lebedeff. The latter
appeared, carrying his hatchet, and covered with confusion. Then it came
out that the hedgehog was not theirs, but the property of a schoolmate,
one Petroff, who had given them some money to buy Schlosser's History
for him, from another schoolfellow who at that moment was driven to
raising money by the sale of his books. Colia and Kostia were about to
make this purchase for their friend when chance brought the hedgehog
to their notice, and they had succumbed to the temptation of buying it.
They were now taking Petroff the hedgehog and hatchet which they had
bought with his money, instead of Schiosser's History. But Aglaya so
entreated them that at last they consented to sell her the hedgehog. As
soon as she had got possession of it, she put it in a wicker basket with
Colia's help, and covered it with a napkin. Then she said to Colia: "Go
and take this hedgehog to the prince from me, and ask him to accept it
as a token of my profound respect." Colia joyfully promised to do the
errand, but he demanded explanations. "What does the hedgehog mean? What
is the meaning of such a present?" Aglaya replied that it was none of
his business. "I am sure that there is some allegory about it," Colia
persisted. Aglaya grew angry, and called him "a silly boy." "If I did
not respect all women in your person," replied Colia, "and if my own
principles would permit it, I would soon prove to you, that I know how
to answer such an insult!" But, in the end, Colia went off with the
hedgehog in great delight, followed by Kostia Lebedeff. Aglaya's
annoyance was soon over, and seeing that Colia was swinging the
hedgehog's basket violently to and fro, she called out to him from the
verandah, as if they had never quarrelled: "Colia, dear, please take
care not to drop him!" Colia appeared to have no grudge against her,
either, for he stopped, and answered most cordially: "No, I will not
drop him! Don't be afraid, Aglaya Ivanovna!" After which he went on his
way. Aglaya burst out laughing and ran up to her room, highly delighted.
Her good spirits lasted the whole day.

All this filled poor Lizabetha's mind with chaotic confusion. What on
earth did it all mean? The most disturbing feature was the hedgehog.
What was the symbolic signification of a hedgehog? What did they
understand by it? What underlay it? Was it a cryptic message?

Poor General Epanchin "put his foot in it" by answering the above
questions in his own way. He said there was no cryptic message at
all. As for the hedgehog, it was just a hedgehog, which meant
nothing--unless, indeed, it was a pledge of friendship,--the sign of
forgetting of offences and so on. At all events, it was a joke, and, of
course, a most pardonable and innocent one.

We may as well remark that the general had guessed perfectly accurately.

The prince, returning home from the interview with Aglaya, had sat
gloomy and depressed for half an hour. He was almost in despair when
Colia arrived with the hedgehog.

Then the sky cleared in a moment. The prince seemed to arise from the
dead; he asked Colia all about it, made him repeat the story over and
over again, and laughed and shook hands with the boys in his delight.

It seemed clear to the prince that Aglaya forgave him, and that he might
go there again this very evening; and in his eyes that was not only the
main thing, but everything in the world.

"What children we are still, Colia!" he cried at last,
enthusiastically,--"and how delightful it is that we can be children
still!"

"Simply--my dear prince,--simply she is in love with you,--that's the
whole of the secret!" replied Colia, with authority.

The prince blushed, but this time he said nothing. Colia burst out
laughing and clapped his hands. A minute later the prince laughed too,
and from this moment until the evening he looked at his watch every
other minute to see how much time he had to wait before evening came.

But the situation was becoming rapidly critical.

Mrs. Epanchin could bear her suspense no longer, and in spite of the
opposition of husband and daughters, she sent for Aglaya, determined to
get a straightforward answer out of her, once for all.

"Otherwise," she observed hysterically, "I shall die before evening."

It was only now that everyone realized to what a ridiculous dead-lock
the whole matter had been brought. Excepting feigned surprise,
indignation, laughter, and jeering--both at the prince and at everyone
who asked her questions,--nothing could be got out of Aglaya.

Lizabetha Prokofievna went to bed and only rose again in time for tea,
when the prince might be expected.

She awaited him in trembling agitation; and when he at last arrived she
nearly went off into hysterics.

Muishkin himself came in very timidly. He seemed to feel his way, and
looked in each person's eyes in a questioning way,--for Aglaya was
absent, which fact alarmed him at once.

This evening there were no strangers present--no one but the immediate
members of the family. Prince S. was still in town, occupied with the
affairs of Evgenie Pavlovitch's uncle.

"I wish at least HE would come and say something!" complained poor
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The general sat still with a most preoccupied air. The sisters were
looking very serious and did not speak a word, and Lizabetha Prokofievna
did not know how to commence the conversation.

At length she plunged into an energetic and hostile criticism of
railways, and glared at the prince defiantly.

Alas Aglaya still did not come--and the prince was quite lost. He had
the greatest difficulty in expressing his opinion that railways were
most useful institutions,--and in the middle of his speech Adelaida
laughed, which threw him into a still worse state of confusion.

At this moment in marched Aglaya, as calm and collected as could be.
She gave the prince a ceremonious bow and solemnly took up a
prominent position near the big round table. She looked at the prince
questioningly.

All present realized that the moment for the settlement of perplexities
had arrived.

"Did you get my hedgehog?" she inquired, firmly and almost angrily.

"Yes, I got it," said the prince, blushing.

"Tell us now, at once, what you made of the present? I must have you
answer this question for mother's sake; she needs pacifying, and so do
all the rest of the family!"

"Look here, Aglaya--" began the general.

"This--this is going beyond all limits!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
suddenly alarmed.

"It is not in the least beyond all limits, mamma!" said her daughter,
firmly. "I sent the prince a hedgehog this morning, and I wish to hear
his opinion of it. Go on, prince."

"What--what sort of opinion, Aglaya Ivanovna?"

"About the hedgehog."

"That is--I suppose you wish to know how I received the hedgehog, Aglaya
Ivanovna,--or, I should say, how I regarded your sending him to me? In
that case, I may tell you--in a word--that I--in fact--"

He paused, breathless.

"Come--you haven't told us much!" said Aglaya, after waiting some five
seconds. "Very well, I am ready to drop the hedgehog, if you like; but
I am anxious to be able to clear up this accumulation of
misunderstandings. Allow me to ask you, prince,--I wish to hear from
you, personally--are you making me an offer, or not?"

"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna. The prince started.
The general stiffened in his chair; the sisters frowned.

"Don't deceive me now, prince--tell the truth. All these people
persecute me with astounding questions--about you. Is there any ground
for all these questions, or not? Come!"

"I have not asked you to marry me yet, Aglaya Ivanovna," said the
prince, becoming suddenly animated; "but you know yourself how much I
love you and trust you."

"No--I asked you this--answer this! Do you intend to ask for my band, or
not?"

"Yes--I do ask for it!" said the prince, more dead than alive now.

There was a general stir in the room.

"No--no--my dear girl," began the general. "You cannot proceed like
this, Aglaya, if that's how the matter stands. It's impossible. Prince,
forgive it, my dear fellow, but--Lizabetha Prokofievna!"--he appealed to
his spouse for help--"you must really--"

"Not I--not I! I retire from all responsibility," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with a wave of the hand.

"Allow me to speak, please, mamma," said Aglaya. "I think I ought to
have something to say in the matter. An important moment of my destiny
is about to be decided"--(this is how Aglaya expressed herself)--"and
I wish to find out how the matter stands, for my own sake, though I am
glad you are all here. Allow me to ask you, prince, since you cherish
those intentions, how you consider that you will provide for my
happiness?"

"I--I don't quite know how to answer your question, Aglaya Ivanovna.
What is there to say to such a question? And--and must I answer?"

"I think you are rather overwhelmed and out of breath. Have a little
rest, and try to recover yourself. Take a glass of water, or--but
they'll give you some tea directly."

"I love you, Aglaya Ivanovna,--I love you very much. I love only
you--and--please don't jest about it, for I do love you very much."

"Well, this matter is important. We are not children--we must look into
it thoroughly. Now then, kindly tell me--what does your fortune consist
of?"

"No--Aglaya--come, enough of this, you mustn't behave like this," said
her father, in dismay.

"It's disgraceful," said Lizabetha Prokofievna in a loud whisper.

"She's mad--quite!" said Alexandra.

"Fortune--money--do you mean?" asked the prince in some surprise.

"Just so."

"I have now--let's see--I have a hundred and thirty-five thousand
roubles," said the prince, blushing violently.

"Is that all, really?" said Aglaya, candidly, without the slightest
show of confusion. "However, it's not so bad, especially if managed with
economy. Do you intend to serve?"

"I--I intended to try for a certificate as private tutor."

"Very good. That would increase our income nicely. Have you any
intention of being a Kammer-junker?"

"A Kammer-junker? I had not thought of it, but--"

But here the two sisters could restrain themselves no longer, and both
of them burst into irrepressible laughter.

Adelaida had long since detected in Aglaya's features the gathering
signs of an approaching storm of laughter, which she restrained with
amazing self-control.

Aglaya looked menacingly at her laughing sisters, but could not contain
herself any longer, and the next minute she too had burst into an
irrepressible, and almost hysterical, fit of mirth. At length she jumped
up, and ran out of the room.

"I knew it was all a joke!" cried Adelaida. "I felt it ever since--since
the hedgehog."

"No, no! I cannot allow this,--this is a little too much," cried
Lizabetha Prokofievna, exploding with rage, and she rose from her seat
and followed Aglaya out of the room as quickly as she could.

The two sisters hurriedly went after her.

The prince and the general were the only two persons left in the room.

"It's--it's really--now could you have imagined anything like it, Lef
Nicolaievitch?" cried the general. He was evidently so much agitated
that he hardly knew what he wished to say. "Seriously now, seriously I
mean--"

"I only see that Aglaya Ivanovna is laughing at me," said the poor
prince, sadly.

"Wait a bit, my boy, I'll just go--you stay here, you know. But do just
explain, if you can, Lef Nicolaievitch, how in the world has all this
come about? And what does it all mean? You must understand, my dear
fellow; I am a father, you see, and I ought to be allowed to understand
the matter--do explain, I beg you!"

"I love Aglaya Ivanovna--she knows it,--and I think she must have long
known it."

The general shrugged his shoulders.

"Strange--it's strange," he said, "and you love her very much?"

"Yes, very much."

"Well--it's all most strange to me. That is--my dear fellow, it is
such a surprise--such a blow--that... You see, it is not your financial
position (though I should not object if you were a bit richer)--I am
thinking of my daughter's happiness, of course, and the thing is--are
you able to give her the happiness she deserves? And then--is all this
a joke on her part, or is she in earnest? I don't mean on your side, but
on hers."

At this moment Alexandra's voice was heard outside the door, calling out
"Papa!"

"Wait for me here, my boy--will you? Just wait and think it all over,
and I'll come back directly," he said hurriedly, and made off with what
looked like the rapidity of alarm in response to Alexandra's call.

He found the mother and daughter locked in one another's arms, mingling
their tears.

These were the tears of joy and peace and reconciliation. Aglaya was
kissing her mother's lips and cheeks and hands; they were hugging each
other in the most ardent way.

"There, look at her now--Ivan Fedorovitch! Here she is--all of her! This
is our REAL Aglaya at last!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna.

Aglaya raised her happy, tearful face from her mother's breast, glanced
at her father, and burst out laughing. She sprang at him and hugged him
too, and kissed him over and over again. She then rushed back to her
mother and hid her face in the maternal bosom, and there indulged in
more tears. Her mother covered her with a corner of her shawl.

"Oh, you cruel little girl! How will you treat us all next, I wonder?"
she said, but she spoke with a ring of joy in her voice, and as though
she breathed at last without the oppression which she had felt so long.

"Cruel?" sobbed Aglaya. "Yes, I AM cruel, and worthless, and
spoiled--tell father so,--oh, here he is--I forgot Father, listen!" She
laughed through her tears.

"My darling, my little idol," cried the general, kissing and fondling
her hands (Aglaya did not draw them away); "so you love this young man,
do you?"

"No, no, no, can't BEAR him, I can't BEAR your young man!" cried
Aglaya, raising her head. "And if you dare say that ONCE more, papa--I'm
serious, you know, I'm,--do you hear me--I'm serious!"

She certainly did seem to be serious enough. She had flushed up all over
and her eyes were blazing.

The general felt troubled and remained silent, while Lizabetha
Prokofievna telegraphed to him from behind Aglaya to ask no questions.

"If that's the case, darling--then, of course, you shall do exactly as
you like. He is waiting alone downstairs. Hadn't I better hint to him
gently that he can go?" The general telegraphed to Lizabetha Prokofievna
in his turn.

"No, no, you needn't do anything of the sort; you mustn't hint gently
at all. I'll go down myself directly. I wish to apologize to this young
man, because I hurt his feelings."

"Yes, SERIOUSLY," said the general, gravely.

"Well, you'd better stay here, all of you, for a little, and I'll go
down to him alone to begin with. I'll just go in and then you can follow
me almost at once. That's the best way."

She had almost reached the door when she turned round again.

"I shall laugh--I know I shall; I shall die of laughing," she said,
lugubriously.

However, she turned and ran down to the prince as fast as her feet could
carry her.

"Well, what does it all mean? What do you make of it?" asked the general
of his spouse, hurriedly.

"I hardly dare say," said Lizabetha, as hurriedly, "but I think it's as
plain as anything can be."

"I think so too, as clear as day; she loves him."

"Loves him? She is head over ears in love, that's what she is," put in
Alexandra.

"Well, God bless her, God bless her, if such is her destiny," said
Lizabetha, crossing herself devoutly.

"H'm destiny it is," said the general, "and there's no getting out of
destiny."

With these words they all moved off towards the drawing-room, where
another surprise awaited them. Aglaya had not only not laughed, as she
had feared, but had gone to the prince rather timidly, and said to him:

"Forgive a silly, horrid, spoilt girl"--(she took his hand here)--"and
be quite assured that we all of us esteem you beyond all words. And if I
dared to turn your beautiful, admirable simplicity to ridicule, forgive
me as you would a little child its mischief. Forgive me all my absurdity
of just now, which, of course, meant nothing, and could not have the
slightest consequence." She spoke these words with great emphasis.

Her father, mother, and sisters came into the room and were much struck
with the last words, which they just caught as they entered--"absurdity
which of course meant nothing"--and still more so with the emphasis with
which Aglaya had spoken.

They exchanged glances questioningly, but the prince did not seem to
have understood the meaning of Aglaya's words; he was in the highest
heaven of delight.

"Why do you speak so?" he murmured. "Why do you ask my forgiveness?"

He wished to add that he was unworthy of being asked for forgiveness
by her, but paused. Perhaps he did understand Aglaya's sentence about
"absurdity which meant nothing," and like the strange fellow that he
was, rejoiced in the words.

Undoubtedly the fact that he might now come and see Aglaya as much as
he pleased again was quite enough to make him perfectly happy; that he
might come and speak to her, and see her, and sit by her, and walk with
her--who knows, but that all this was quite enough to satisfy him for
the whole of his life, and that he would desire no more to the end of
time?

(Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that this might be the case, and she didn't
like it; though very probably she could not have put the idea into
words.)

It would be difficult to describe the animation and high spirits which
distinguished the prince for the rest of the evening.

He was so happy that "it made one feel happy to look at him," as
Aglaya's sisters expressed it afterwards. He talked, and told stories
just as he had done once before, and never since, namely on the very
first morning of his acquaintance with the Epanchins, six months ago.
Since his return to Petersburg from Moscow, he had been remarkably
silent, and had told Prince S. on one occasion, before everyone, that he
did not think himself justified in degrading any thought by his unworthy
words.

But this evening he did nearly all the talking himself, and told stories
by the dozen, while he answered all questions put to him clearly,
gladly, and with any amount of detail.

There was nothing, however, of love-making in his talk. His ideas were
all of the most serious kind; some were even mystical and profound.

He aired his own views on various matters, some of his most private
opinions and observations, many of which would have seemed rather funny,
so his hearers agreed afterwards, had they not been so well expressed.

The general liked serious subjects of conversation; but both he and
Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that they were having a little too much of a
good thing tonight, and as the evening advanced, they both grew more
or less melancholy; but towards night, the prince fell to telling funny
stories, and was always the first to burst out laughing himself, which
he invariably did so joyously and simply that the rest laughed just as
much at him as at his stories.

As for Aglaya, she hardly said a word all the evening; but she listened
with all her ears to Lef Nicolaievitch's talk, and scarcely took her
eyes off him.

"She looked at him, and stared and stared, and hung on every word he
said," said Lizabetha afterwards, to her husband, "and yet, tell her
that she loves him, and she is furious!"

"What's to be done? It's fate," said the general, shrugging his
shoulders, and, for a long while after, he continued to repeat: "It's
fate, it's fate!"

We may add that to a business man like General Epanchin the present
position of affairs was most unsatisfactory. He hated the uncertainty in
which they had been, perforce, left. However, he decided to say no
more about it, and merely to look on, and take his time and tune from
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The happy state in which the family had spent the evening, as just
recorded, was not of very long duration. Next day Aglaya quarrelled with
the prince again, and so she continued to behave for the next few days.
For whole hours at a time she ridiculed and chaffed the wretched man,
and made him almost a laughing-stock.

It is true that they used to sit in the little summer-house together for
an hour or two at a time, very often, but it was observed that on
these occasions the prince would read the paper, or some book, aloud to
Aglaya.

"Do you know," Aglaya said to him once, interrupting the reading, "I've
remarked that you are dreadfully badly educated. You never know anything
thoroughly, if one asks you; neither anyone's name, nor dates, nor about
treaties and so on. It's a great pity, you know!"

"I told you I had not had much of an education," replied the prince.

"How am I to respect you, if that's the case? Read on now. No--don't!
Stop reading!"

And once more, that same evening, Aglaya mystified them all. Prince S.
had returned, and Aglaya was particularly amiable to him, and asked a
great deal after Evgenie Pavlovitch. (Muishkin had not come in as yet.)

Suddenly Prince S. hinted something about "a new and approaching
change in the family." He was led to this remark by a communication
inadvertently made to him by Lizabetha Prokofievna, that Adelaida's
marriage must be postponed a little longer, in order that the two
weddings might come off together.

It is impossible to describe Aglaya's irritation. She flared up, and
said some indignant words about "all these silly insinuations."
She added that "she had no intentions as yet of replacing anybody's
mistress."

These words painfully impressed the whole party; but especially her
parents. Lizabetha Prokofievna summoned a secret council of two, and
insisted upon the general's demanding from the prince a full explanation
of his relations with Nastasia Philipovna. The general argued that it
was only a whim of Aglaya's; and that, had not Prince S. unfortunately
made that remark, which had confused the child and made her blush, she
never would have said what she did; and that he was sure Aglaya knew
well that anything she might have heard of the prince and Nastasia
Philipovna was merely the fabrication of malicious tongues, and that
the woman was going to marry Rogojin. He insisted that the prince had
nothing whatever to do with Nastasia Philipovna, so far as any liaison
was concerned; and, if the truth were to be told about it, he added,
never had had.

Meanwhile nothing put the prince out, and he continued to be in the
seventh heaven of bliss. Of course he could not fail to observe some
impatience and ill-temper in Aglaya now and then; but he believed in
something else, and nothing could now shake his conviction. Besides,
Aglaya's frowns never lasted long; they disappeared of themselves.

Perhaps he was too easy in his mind. So thought Hippolyte, at all
events, who met him in the park one day.

"Didn't I tell you the truth now, when I said you were in love?" he
said, coming up to Muishkin of his own accord, and stopping him.

The prince gave him his hand and congratulated him upon "looking so
well."

Hippolyte himself seemed to be hopeful about his state of health, as is
often the case with consumptives.

He had approached the prince with the intention of talking sarcastically
about his happy expression of face, but very soon forgot his intention
and began to talk about himself. He began complaining about everything,
disconnectedly and endlessly, as was his wont.

"You wouldn't believe," he concluded, "how irritating they all are
there. They are such wretchedly small, vain, egotistical, COMMONPLACE
people! Would you believe it, they invited me there under the express
condition that I should die quickly, and they are all as wild as
possible with me for not having died yet, and for being, on the
contrary, a good deal better! Isn't it a comedy? I don't mind betting
that you don't believe me!"

The prince said nothing.

"I sometimes think of coming over to you again," said Hippolyte,
carelessly. "So you DON'T think them capable of inviting a man on the
condition that he is to look sharp and die?"

"I certainly thought they invited you with quite other views."

"Ho, ho! you are not nearly so simple as they try to make you out! This
is not the time for it, or I would tell you a thing or two about that
beauty, Gania, and his hopes. You are being undermined, pitilessly
undermined, and--and it is really melancholy to see you so calm about
it. But alas! it's your nature--you can't help it!"

"My word! what a thing to be melancholy about! Why, do you think I
should be any happier if I were to feel disturbed about the excavations
you tell me of?"

"It is better to be unhappy and know the worst, than to be happy in a
fool's paradise! I suppose you don't believe that you have a rival in
that quarter?"

"Your insinuations as to rivalry are rather cynical, Hippolyte. I'm
sorry to say I have no right to answer you! As for Gania, I put it to
you, CAN any man have a happy mind after passing through what he has had
to suffer? I think that is the best way to look at it. He will
change yet, he has lots of time before him, and life is rich;
besides--besides..." the prince hesitated. "As to being undermined, I
don't know what in the world you are driving at, Hippolyte. I think we
had better drop the subject!"

"Very well, we'll drop it for a while. You can't look at anything but
in your exalted, generous way. You must put out your finger and touch a
thing before you'll believe it, eh? Ha! ha! ha! I suppose you despise me
dreadfully, prince, eh? What do you think?"

"Why? Because you have suffered more than we have?"

"No; because I am unworthy of my sufferings, if you like!"

"Whoever CAN suffer is worthy to suffer, I should think. Aglaya Ivanovna
wished to see you, after she had read your confession, but--"

"She postponed the pleasure--I see--I quite understand!" said Hippolyte,
hurriedly, as though he wished to banish the subject. "I hear--they
tell me--that you read her all that nonsense aloud? Stupid @ bosh it
was--written in delirium. And I can't understand how anyone can be so
I won't say CRUEL, because the word would be humiliating to myself, but
we'll say childishly vain and revengeful, as to REPROACH me with this
confession, and use it as a weapon against me. Don't be afraid, I'm not
referring to yourself."

"Oh, but I'm sorry you repudiate the confession, Hippolyte--it is
sincere; and, do you know, even the absurd parts of it--and these are
many" (here Hippolyte frowned savagely) "are, as it were, redeemed by
suffering--for it must have cost you something to admit what you there
say--great torture, perhaps, for all I know. Your motive must have
been a very noble one all through. Whatever may have appeared to the
contrary, I give you my word, I see this more plainly every day. I do
not judge you; I merely say this to have it off my mind, and I am only
sorry that I did not say it all THEN--"

Hippolyte flushed hotly. He had thought at first that the prince
was "humbugging" him; but on looking at his face he saw that he was
absolutely serious, and had no thought of any deception. Hippolyte
beamed with gratification.

"And yet I must die," he said, and almost added: "a man like me @

"And imagine how that Gania annoys me! He has developed the idea--or
pretends to believe--that in all probability three or four others who
heard my confession will die before I do. There's an idea for you--and
all this by way of CONSOLING me! Ha! ha! ha! In the first place they
haven't died yet; and in the second, if they DID die--all of them--what
would be the satisfaction to me in that? He judges me by himself. But he
goes further, he actually pitches into me because, as he declares, 'any
decent fellow' would die quietly, and that 'all this' is mere egotism
on my part. He doesn't see what refinement of egotism it is on his own
part--and at the same time, what ox-like coarseness! Have you ever read
of the death of one Stepan Gleboff, in the eighteenth century? I read of
it yesterday by chance."

"Who was he?"

"He was impaled on a stake in the time of Peter."

"I know, I know! He lay there fifteen hours in the hard frost, and died
with the most extraordinary fortitude--I know--what of him?"

"Only that God gives that sort of dying to some, and not to others.
Perhaps you think, though, that I could not die like Gleboff?"

"Not at all!" said the prince, blushing. "I was only going to say that
you--not that you could not be like Gleboff--but that you would have
been more like--"

"I guess what you mean--I should be an Osterman, not a Gleboff--eh? Is
that what you meant?"

"What Osterman?" asked the prince in some surprise.

"Why, Osterman--the diplomatist. Peter's Osterman," muttered Hippolyte,
confused. There was a moment's pause of mutual confusion.

"Oh, no, no!" said the prince at last, "that was not what I was going to
say--oh no! I don't think you would ever have been like Osterman."

Hippolyte frowned gloomily.

"I'll tell you why I draw the conclusion," explained the prince,
evidently desirous of clearing up the matter a little. "Because, though
I often think over the men of those times, I cannot for the life of me
imagine them to be like ourselves. It really appears to me that they
were of another race altogether than ourselves of today. At that time
people seemed to stick so to one idea; now, they are more nervous, more
sensitive, more enlightened--people of two or three ideas at once--as
it were. The man of today is a broader man, so to speak--and I declare
I believe that is what prevents him from being so self-contained and
independent a being as his brother of those earlier days. Of course my
remark was only made under this impression, and not in the least--"

"I quite understand. You are trying to comfort me for the naiveness with
which you disagreed with me--eh? Ha! ha! ha! You are a regular
child, prince! However, I cannot help seeing that you always treat me
like--like a fragile china cup. Never mind, never mind, I'm not a bit
angry! At all events we have had a very funny talk. Do you know, all
things considered, I should like to be something better than Osterman!
I wouldn't take the trouble to rise from the dead to be an Osterman.
However, I see I must make arrangements to die soon, or I myself--.
Well--leave me now! Au revoir. Look here--before you go, just give me
your opinion: how do you think I ought to die, now? I mean--the best,
the most virtuous way? Tell me!"

"You should pass us by and forgive us our happiness," said the prince in
a low voice.

"Ha! ha! ha! I thought so. I thought I should hear something like
that. Well, you are--you really are--oh dear me! Eloquence, eloquence!
Good-bye!"

VI.

As to the evening party at the Epanchins' at which Princess Bielokonski
was to be present, Varia had reported with accuracy; though she had
perhaps expressed herself too strongly.

The thing was decided in a hurry and with a certain amount of quite
unnecessary excitement, doubtless because "nothing could be done in this
house like anywhere else."

The impatience of Lizabetha Prokofievna "to get things settled"
explained a good deal, as well as the anxiety of both parents for the
happiness of their beloved daughter. Besides, Princess Bielokonski was
going away soon, and they hoped that she would take an interest in
the prince. They were anxious that he should enter society under the
auspices of this lady, whose patronage was the best of recommendations
for any young man.

Even if there seems something strange about the match, the general and
his wife said to each other, the "world" will accept Aglaya's fiance
without any question if he is under the patronage of the princess. In
any case, the prince would have to be "shown" sooner or later; that is,
introduced into society, of which he had, so far, not the least idea.
Moreover, it was only a question of a small gathering of a few intimate
friends. Besides Princess Bielokonski, only one other lady was expected,
the wife of a high dignitary. Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was to escort the
princess, was the only young man.

Muishkin was told of the princess's visit three days beforehand, but
nothing was said to him about the party until the night before it was to
take place.

He could not help observing the excited and agitated condition of all
members of the family, and from certain hints dropped in conversation he
gathered that they were all anxious as to the impression he should
make upon the princess. But the Epanchins, one and all, believed that
Muishkin, in his simplicity of mind, was quite incapable of realizing
that they could be feeling any anxiety on his account, and for this
reason they all looked at him with dread and uneasiness.

In point of fact, he did attach marvellously little importance to the
approaching event. He was occupied with altogether different thoughts.
Aglaya was growing hourly more capricious and gloomy, and this
distressed him. When they told him that Evgenie Pavlovitch was expected,
he evinced great delight, and said that he had long wished to see
him--and somehow these words did not please anyone.

Aglaya left the room in a fit of irritation, and it was not until late
in the evening, past eleven, when the prince was taking his departure,
that she said a word or two to him, privately, as she accompanied him as
far as the front door.

"I should like you," she said, "not to come here tomorrow until evening,
when the guests are all assembled. You know there are to be guests,
don't you?"

She spoke impatiently and with severity; this was the first allusion she
had made to the party of tomorrow.

She hated the idea of it, everyone saw that; and she would probably
have liked to quarrel about it with her parents, but pride and modesty
prevented her from broaching the subject.

The prince jumped to the conclusion that Aglaya, too, was nervous about
him, and the impression he would make, and that she did not like to
admit her anxiety; and this thought alarmed him.

"Yes, I am invited," he replied.

She was evidently in difficulties as to how best to go on. "May I speak
of something serious to you, for once in my life?" she asked, angrily.
She was irritated at she knew not what, and could not restrain her
wrath.

"Of course you may; I am very glad to listen," replied Muishkin.

Aglaya was silent a moment and then began again with evident dislike of
her subject:

"I do not wish to quarrel with them about this; in some things they
won't be reasonable. I always did feel a loathing for the laws which
seem to guide mamma's conduct at times. I don't speak of father, for
he cannot be expected to be anything but what he is. Mother is a
noble-minded woman, I know; you try to suggest anything mean to her,
and you'll see! But she is such a slave to these miserable creatures! I
don't mean old Bielokonski alone. She is a contemptible old thing, but
she is able to twist people round her little finger, and I admire that
in her, at all events! How mean it all is, and how foolish! We were
always middle-class, thoroughly middle-class, people. Why should we
attempt to climb into the giddy heights of the fashionable world? My
sisters are all for it. It's Prince S. they have to thank for poisoning
their minds. Why are you so glad that Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming?"

"Listen to me, Aglaya," said the prince, "I do believe you are nervous
lest I shall make a fool of myself tomorrow at your party?"

"Nervous about you?" Aglaya blushed. "Why should I be nervous about
you? What would it matter to me if you were to make ever such a fool of
yourself? How can you say such a thing? What do you mean by 'making a
fool of yourself'? What a vulgar expression! I suppose you intend to
talk in that sort of way tomorrow evening? Look up a few more such
expressions in your dictionary; do, you'll make a grand effect! I'm
sorry that you seem to be able to come into a room as gracefully as you
do; where did you learn the art? Do you think you can drink a cup of tea
decently, when you know everybody is looking at you, on purpose to see
how you do it?"

"Yes, I think I can."

"Can you? I'm sorry for it then, for I should have had a good laugh at
you otherwise. Do break SOMETHING at least, in the drawing-room! Upset
the Chinese vase, won't you? It's a valuable one; DO break it. Mamma
values it, and she'll go out of her mind--it was a present. She'll cry
before everyone, you'll see! Wave your hand about, you know, as you
always do, and just smash it. Sit down near it on purpose."

"On the contrary, I shall sit as far from it as I can. Thanks for the
hint."

"Ha, ha! Then you are afraid you WILL wave your arms about! I wouldn't
mind betting that you'll talk about some lofty subject, something
serious and learned. How delightful, how tactful that will be!"

"I should think it would be very foolish indeed, unless it happened to
come in appropriately."

"Look here, once for all," cried Aglaya, boiling over, "if I hear you
talking about capital punishment, or the economical condition of
Russia, or about Beauty redeeming the world, or anything of that sort,
I'll--well, of course I shall laugh and seem very pleased, but I warn
you beforehand, don't look me in the face again! I'm serious now,
mind, this time I AM REALLY serious." She certainly did say this very
seriously, so much so, that she looked quite different from what she
usually was, and the prince could not help noticing the fact. She did
not seem to be joking in the slightest degree.

"Well, you've put me into such a fright that I shall certainly make
a fool of myself, and very likely break something too. I wasn't a bit
alarmed before, but now I'm as nervous as can be."

"Then don't speak at all. Sit still and don't talk."

"Oh, I can't do that, you know! I shall say something foolish out of
pure 'funk,' and break something for the same excellent reason; I know
I shall. Perhaps I shall slip and fall on the slippery floor; I've done
that before now, you know. I shall dream of it all night now. Why did
you say anything about it?"

Aglaya looked blackly at him.

"Do you know what, I had better not come at all tomorrow! I'll plead
sick-list and stay away," said the prince, with decision.

Aglaya stamped her foot, and grew quite pale with anger.

"Oh, my goodness! Just listen to that! 'Better not come,' when the party
is on purpose for him! Good Lord! What a delightful thing it is to have
to do with such a--such a stupid as you are!"

"Well, I'll come, I'll come," interrupted the prince, hastily, "and I'll
give you my word of honour that I will sit the whole evening and not say
a word."

"I believe that's the best thing you can do. You said you'd 'plead
sick-list' just now; where in the world do you get hold of such
expressions? Why do you talk to me like this? Are you trying to irritate
me, or what?"

"Forgive me, it's a schoolboy expression. I won't do it again. I know
quite well, I see it, that you are anxious on my account (now, don't be
angry), and it makes me very happy to see it. You wouldn't believe
how frightened I am of misbehaving somehow, and how glad I am of your
instructions. But all this panic is simply nonsense, you know, Aglaya! I
give you my word it is; I am so pleased that you are such a child, such
a dear good child. How CHARMING you can be if you like, Aglaya."

Aglaya wanted to be angry, of course, but suddenly some quite unexpected
feeling seized upon her heart, all in a moment.

"And you won't reproach me for all these rude words of mine--some
day--afterwards?" she asked, of a sudden.

"What an idea! Of course not. And what are you blushing for again? And
there comes that frown once more! You've taken to looking too gloomy
sometimes, Aglaya, much more than you used to. I know why it is."

"Be quiet, do be quiet!"

"No, no, I had much better speak out. I have long wished to say it, and
HAVE said it, but that's not enough, for you didn't believe me. Between
us two there stands a being who--"

"Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, be quiet!" Aglaya struck in, suddenly,
seizing his hand in hers, and gazing at him almost in terror.

At this moment she was called by someone. She broke loose from him with
an air of relief and ran away.

The prince was in a fever all night. It was strange, but he had suffered
from fever for several nights in succession. On this particular night,
while in semi-delirium, he had an idea: what if on the morrow he were
to have a fit before everybody? The thought seemed to freeze his blood
within him. All night he fancied himself in some extraordinary society
of strange persons. The worst of it was that he was talking nonsense;
he knew that he ought not to speak at all, and yet he talked the whole
time; he seemed to be trying to persuade them all to something. Evgenie
and Hippolyte were among the guests, and appeared to be great friends.

He awoke towards nine o'clock with a headache, full of confused ideas
and strange impressions. For some reason or other he felt most anxious
to see Rogojin, to see and talk to him, but what he wished to say he
could not tell. Next, he determined to go and see Hippolyte. His mind
was in a confused state, so much so that the incidents of the morning
seemed to be imperfectly realized, though acutely felt.

One of these incidents was a visit from Lebedeff. Lebedeff came rather
early--before ten--but he was tipsy already. Though the prince was not
in an observant condition, yet he could not avoid seeing that for at
least three days--ever since General Ivolgin had left the house Lebedeff
had been behaving very badly. He looked untidy and dirty at all times
of the day, and it was said that he had begun to rage about in his own
house, and that his temper was very bad. As soon as he arrived this
morning, he began to hold forth, beating his breast and apparently
blaming himself for something.

"I've--I've had a reward for my meanness--I've had a slap in the face,"
he concluded, tragically.

"A slap in the face? From whom? And so early in the morning?"

"Early?" said Lebedeff, sarcastically. "Time counts for nothing, even in
physical chastisement; but my slap in the face was not physical, it was
moral."

He suddenly took a seat, very unceremoniously, and began his story. It
was very disconnected; the prince frowned, and wished he could get away;
but suddenly a few words struck him. He sat stiff with wonder--Lebedeff
said some extraordinary things.

In the first place he began about some letter; the name of Aglaya
Ivanovna came in. Then suddenly he broke off and began to accuse the
prince of something; he was apparently offended with him. At first he
declared that the prince had trusted him with his confidences as to "a
certain person" (Nastasia Philipovna), but that of late his friendship
had been thrust back into his bosom, and his innocent question as to
"approaching family changes" had been curtly put aside, which Lebedeff
declared, with tipsy tears, he could not bear; especially as he knew so
much already both from Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna and her friend,
and from Varvara Ardalionovna, and even from Aglaya Ivanovna, through
his daughter Vera. "And who told Lizabetha Prokofievna something in
secret, by letter? Who told her all about the movements of a certain
person called Nastasia Philipovna? Who was the anonymous person, eh?
Tell me!"

"Surely not you?" cried the prince.

"Just so," said Lebedeff, with dignity; "and only this very morning I
have sent up a letter to the noble lady, stating that I have a matter of
great importance to communicate. She received the letter; I know she got
it; and she received ME, too."

"Have you just seen Lizabetha Prokofievna?" asked the prince, scarcely
believing his ears.

"Yes, I saw her, and got the said slap in the face as mentioned. She
chucked the letter back to me unopened, and kicked me out of the house,
morally, not physically, although not far off it."

"What letter do you mean she returned unopened?"

"What! didn't I tell you? Ha, ha, ha! I thought I had. Why, I received a
letter, you know, to be handed over--"

"From whom? To whom?"

But it was difficult, if not impossible, to extract anything from
Lebedeff. All the prince could gather was, that the letter had been
received very early, and had a request written on the outside that it
might be sent on to the address given.

"Just as before, sir, just as before! To a certain person, and from
a certain hand. The individual's name who wrote the letter is to be
represented by the letter A.--"

"What? Impossible! To Nastasia Philipovna? Nonsense!" cried the prince.

"It was, I assure you, and if not to her then to Rogojin, which is
the same thing. Mr. Hippolyte has had letters, too, and all from the
individual whose name begins with an A.," smirked Lebedeff, with a
hideous grin.

As he kept jumping from subject to subject, and forgetting what he had
begun to talk about, the prince said nothing, but waited, to give him
time.

It was all very vague. Who had taken the letters, if letters there were?
Probably Vera--and how could Lebedeff have got them? In all probability,
he had managed to steal the present letter from Vera, and had himself
gone over to Lizabetha Prokofievna with some idea in his head. So the
prince concluded at last.

"You are mad!" he cried, indignantly.

"Not quite, esteemed prince," replied Lebedeff, with some acerbity. "I
confess I thought of doing you the service of handing the letter over to
yourself, but I decided that it would pay me better to deliver it up to
the noble lady aforesaid, as I had informed her of everything hitherto
by anonymous letters; so when I sent her up a note from myself, with
the letter, you know, in order to fix a meeting for eight o'clock this
morning, I signed it 'your secret correspondent.' They let me in at
once--very quickly--by the back door, and the noble lady received me."

"Well? Go on."

"Oh, well, when I saw her she almost punched my head, as I say; in fact
so nearly that one might almost say she did punch my head. She threw
the letter in my face; she seemed to reflect first, as if she would
have liked to keep it, but thought better of it and threw it in my face
instead. 'If anybody can have been such a fool as to trust a man like
you to deliver the letter,' says she,' take it and deliver it! 'Hey! she
was grandly indignant. A fierce, fiery lady that, sir!"

"Where's the letter now?"

"Oh, I've still got it, here!"

And he handed the prince the very letter from Aglaya to Gania, which the
latter showed with so much triumph to his Sister at a later hour.

"This letter cannot be allowed to remain in your hands."

"It's for you--for you! I've brought it you on purpose!" cried Lebedeff,
excitedly. "Why, I'm yours again now, heart and hand, your slave; there
was but a momentary pause in the flow of my love and esteem for you. Mea
culpa, mea culpa! as the Pope of Rome says.

"This letter should be sent on at once," said the prince, disturbed.
"I'll hand it over myself."

"Wouldn't it be better, esteemed prince, wouldn't it be
better--to--don't you know--"

Lebedeff made a strange and very expressive grimace; he twisted about in
his chair, and did something, apparently symbolical, with his hands.

"What do you mean?" said the prince.

"Why, open it, for the time being, don't you know?" he said, most
confidentially and mysteriously.

The prince jumped up so furiously that Lebedeff ran towards the door;
having gained which strategic position, however, he stopped and looked
back to see if he might hope for pardon.

"Oh, Lebedeff, Lebedeff! Can a man really sink to such depths of
meanness?" said the prince, sadly.

Lebedeff's face brightened.

"Oh, I'm a mean wretch--a mean wretch!" he said, approaching the prince
once more, and beating his breast, with tears in his eyes.

"It's abominable dishonesty, you know!"

"Dishonesty--it is, it is! That's the very word!"

"What in the world induces you to act so? You are nothing but a spy.
Why did you write anonymously to worry so noble and generous a lady? Why
should not Aglaya Ivanovna write a note to whomever she pleases? What
did you mean to complain of today? What did you expect to get by it?
What made you go at all?"

"Pure amiable curiosity,--I assure you--desire to do a service. That's
all. Now I'm entirely yours again, your slave; hang me if you like!"

"Did you go before Lizabetha Prokofievna in your present condition?"
inquired the prince.

"No--oh no, fresher--more the correct card. I only became this like
after the humiliation I suffered there,

"Well--that'll do; now leave me."

This injunction had to be repeated several times before the man could be
persuaded to move. Even then he turned back at the door, came as far as
the middle of the room, and there went through his mysterious motions
designed to convey the suggestion that the prince should open the
letter. He did not dare put his suggestion into words again.

After this performance, he smiled sweetly and left the room on tiptoe.

All this had been very painful to listen to. One fact stood out certain
and clear, and that was that poor Aglaya must be in a state of great
distress and indecision and mental torment ("from jealousy," the prince
whispered to himself). Undoubtedly in this inexperienced, but hot and
proud little head, there were all sorts of plans forming, wild and
impossible plans, maybe; and the idea of this so frightened the prince
that he could not make up his mind what to do. Something must be done,
that was clear.

He looked at the address on the letter once more. Oh, he was not in the
least degree alarmed about Aglaya writing such a letter; he could trust
her. What he did not like about it was that he could not trust Gania.

However, he made up his mind that he would himself take the note and
deliver it. Indeed, he went so far as to leave the house and walk up the
road, but changed his mind when he had nearly reached Ptitsin's door.
However, he there luckily met Colia, and commissioned him to deliver the
letter to his brother as if direct from Aglaya. Colia asked no questions
but simply delivered it, and Gania consequently had no suspicion that it
had passed through so many hands.

Arrived home again, the prince sent for Vera Lebedeff and told her as
much as was necessary, in order to relieve her mind, for she had been in
a dreadful state of anxiety since she had missed the letter. She heard
with horror that her father had taken it. Muishkin learned from her that
she had on several occasions performed secret missions both for Aglaya
and for Rogojin, without, however, having had the slightest idea that in
so doing she might injure the prince in any way.

The latter, with one thing and another, was now so disturbed and
confused, that when, a couple of hours or so later, a message came from
Colia that the general was ill, he could hardly take the news in.

However, when he did master the fact, it acted upon him as a tonic
by completely distracting his attention. He went at once to Nina
Alexandrovna's, whither the general had been carried, and stayed there
until the evening. He could do no good, but there are people whom
to have near one is a blessing at such times. Colia was in an almost
hysterical state; he cried continuously, but was running about all day,
all the same; fetching doctors, of whom he collected three; going to the
chemist's, and so on.

The general was brought round to some extent, but the doctors
declared that he could not be said to be out of danger. Varia and Nina
Alexandrovna never left the sick man's bedside; Gania was excited and
distressed, but would not go upstairs, and seemed afraid to look at the
patient. He wrung his hands when the prince spoke to him, and said that
"such a misfortune at such a moment" was terrible.

The prince thought he knew what Gania meant by "such a moment."

Hippolyte was not in the house. Lebedeff turned up late in the
afternoon; he had been asleep ever since his interview with the prince
in the morning. He was quite sober now, and cried with real sincerity
over the sick general--mourning for him as though he were his own
brother. He blamed himself aloud, but did not explain why. He repeated
over and over again to Nina Alexandrovna that he alone was to blame--no
one else--but that he had acted out of "pure amiable curiosity," and
that "the deceased," as he insisted upon calling the still living
general, had been the greatest of geniuses.

He laid much stress on the genius of the sufferer, as if this idea must
be one of immense solace in the present crisis.

Nina Alexandrovna--seeing his sincerity of feeling--said at last,
and without the faintest suspicion of reproach in her voice: "Come,
come--don't cry! God will forgive you!"

Lebedeff was so impressed by these words, and the tone in which
they were spoken, that he could not leave Nina Alexandrovna all the
evening--in fact, for several days. Till the general's death, indeed, he
spent almost all his time at his side.

Twice during the day a messenger came to Nina Alexandrovna from the
Epanchins to inquire after the invalid.

When--late in the evening--the prince made his appearance in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's drawing-room, he found it full of guests. Mrs. Epanchin
questioned him very fully about the general as soon as he appeared; and
when old Princess Bielokonski wished to know "who this general was, and
who was Nina Alexandrovna," she proceeded to explain in a manner which
pleased the prince very much.

He himself, when relating the circumstances of the general's illness to
Lizabetha Prokofievna, "spoke beautifully," as Aglaya's sisters declared
afterwards--"modestly, quietly, without gestures or too many words, and
with great dignity." He had entered the room with propriety and grace,
and he was perfectly dressed; he not only did not "fall down on the
slippery floor," as he had expressed it, but evidently made a very
favourable impression upon the assembled guests.

As for his own impression on entering the room and taking his seat,
he instantly remarked that the company was not in the least such
as Aglaya's words had led him to fear, and as he had dreamed of--in
nightmare form--all night.

This was the first time in his life that he had seen a little corner of
what was generally known by the terrible name of "society." He had long
thirsted, for reasons of his own, to penetrate the mysteries of the
magic circle, and, therefore, this assemblage was of the greatest
possible interest to him.

His first impression was one of fascination. Somehow or other he felt
that all these people must have been born on purpose to be together! It
seemed to him that the Epanchins were not having a party at all; that
these people must have been here always, and that he himself was one
of them--returned among them after a long absence, but one of them,
naturally and indisputably.

It never struck him that all this refined simplicity and nobility and
wit and personal dignity might possibly be no more than an exquisite
artistic polish. The majority of the guests--who were somewhat
empty-headed, after all, in spite of their aristocratic bearing--never
guessed, in their self-satisfied composure, that much of their
superiority was mere veneer, which indeed they had adopted unconsciously
and by inheritance.

The prince would never so much as suspect such a thing in the delight of
his first impression.

He saw, for instance, that one important dignitary, old enough to be his
grandfather, broke off his own conversation in order to listen to HIM--a
young and inexperienced man; and not only listened, but seemed to
attach value to his opinion, and was kind and amiable, and yet they
were strangers and had never seen each other before. Perhaps what most
appealed to the prince's impressionability was the refinement of the old
man's courtesy towards him. Perhaps the soil of his susceptible nature
was really predisposed to receive a pleasant impression.

Meanwhile all these people-though friends of the family and of each
other to a certain extent--were very far from being such intimate
friends of the family and of each other as the prince concluded. There
were some present who never would think of considering the Epanchins
their equals. There were even some who hated one another cordially. For
instance, old Princess Bielokonski had all her life despised the wife
of the "dignitary," while the latter was very far from loving Lizabetha
Prokofievna. The dignitary himself had been General Epanchin's protector
from his youth up; and the general considered him so majestic a
personage that he would have felt a hearty contempt for himself if
he had even for one moment allowed himself to pose as the great man's
equal, or to think of him--in his fear and reverence-as anything less
than an Olympic God! There were others present who had not met for
years, and who had no feeling whatever for each other, unless it were
dislike; and yet they met tonight as though they had seen each other but
yesterday in some friendly and intimate assembly of kindred spirits.

It was not a large party, however. Besides Princess Bielokonski and the
old dignitary (who was really a great man) and his wife, there was an
old military general--a count or baron with a German name, a man reputed
to possess great knowledge and administrative ability. He was one
of those Olympian administrators who know everything except Russia,
pronounce a word of extraordinary wisdom, admired by all, about once in
five years, and, after being an eternity in the service, generally die
full of honour and riches, though they have never done anything great,
and have even been hostile to all greatness. This general was Ivan
Fedorovitch's immediate superior in the service; and it pleased the
latter to look upon him also as a patron. On the other hand, the great
man did not at all consider himself Epanchin's patron. He was always
very cool to him, while taking advantage of his ready services, and
would instantly have put another in his place if there had been the
slightest reason for the change.

Another guest was an elderly, important-looking gentleman, a distant
relative of Lizabetha Prokofievna's. This gentleman was rich, held a
good position, was a great talker, and had the reputation of being "one
of the dissatisfied," though not belonging to the dangerous sections
of that class. He had the manners, to some extent, of the English
aristocracy, and some of their tastes (especially in the matter of
under-done roast beef, harness, men-servants, etc.). He was a great
friend of the dignitary's, and Lizabetha Prokofievna, for some reason or
other, had got hold of the idea that this worthy intended at no distant
date to offer the advantages of his hand and heart to Alexandra.

Besides the elevated and more solid individuals enumerated, there were
present a few younger though not less elegant guests. Besides Prince S.
and Evgenie Pavlovitch, we must name the eminent and fascinating Prince
N.--once the vanquisher of female hearts all over Europe. This gentleman
was no longer in the first bloom of youth--he was forty-five, but still
very handsome. He was well off, and lived, as a rule, abroad, and was
noted as a good teller of stories. Then came a few guests belonging to
a lower stratum of society--people who, like the Epanchins themselves,
moved only occasionally in this exalted sphere. The Epanchins liked to
draft among their more elevated guests a few picked representatives of
this lower stratum, and Lizabetha Prokofievna received much praise for
this practice, which proved, her friends said, that she was a woman of
tact. The Epanchins prided themselves upon the good opinion people held
of them.

One of the representatives of the middle-class present today was a
colonel of engineers, a very serious man and a great friend of Prince
S., who had introduced him to the Epanchins. He was extremely silent in
society, and displayed on the forefinger of his right hand a large ring,
probably bestowed upon him for services of some sort. There was also
a poet, German by name, but a Russian poet; very presentable, and even
handsome-the sort of man one could bring into society with impunity.
This gentleman belonged to a German family of decidedly bourgeois
origin, but he had a knack of acquiring the patronage of "big-wigs," and
of retaining their favour. He had translated some great German poem into
Russian verse, and claimed to have been a friend of a famous Russian
poet, since dead. (It is strange how great a multitude of literary
people there are who have had the advantages of friendship with some
great man of their own profession who is, unfortunately, dead.) The
dignitary's wife had introduced this worthy to the Epanchins. This
lady posed as the patroness of literary people, and she certainly
had succeeded in obtaining pensions for a few of them, thanks to her
influence with those in authority on such matters. She was a lady of
weight in her own way. Her age was about forty-five, so that she was a
very young wife for such an elderly husband as the dignitary. She had
been a beauty in her day and still loved, as many ladies of forty-five
do love, to dress a little too smartly. Her intellect was nothing to
boast of, and her literary knowledge very doubtful. Literary patronage
was, however, with her as much a mania as was the love of gorgeous
clothes. Many books and translations were dedicated to her by her
proteges, and a few of these talented individuals had published some of
their own letters to her, upon very weighty subjects.

This, then, was the society that the prince accepted at once as true
coin, as pure gold without alloy.

It so happened, however, that on this particular evening all these good
people were in excellent humour and highly pleased with themselves.
Every one of them felt that they were doing the Epanchins the greatest
possible honour by their presence. But alas! the prince never suspected
any such subtleties! For instance, he had no suspicion of the fact that
the Epanchins, having in their mind so important a step as the marriage
of their daughter, would never think of presuming to take it without
having previously "shown off" the proposed husband to the dignitary--the
recognized patron of the family. The latter, too, though he would
probably have received news of a great disaster to the Epanchin family
with perfect composure, would nevertheless have considered it a personal
offence if they had dared to marry their daughter without his advice, or
we might almost say, his leave.

The amiable and undoubtedly witty Prince N. could not but feel that
he was as a sun, risen for one night only to shine upon the Epanchin
drawing-room. He accounted them immeasurably his inferiors, and it was
this feeling which caused his special amiability and delightful ease and
grace towards them. He knew very well that he must tell some story this
evening for the edification of the company, and led up to it with the
inspiration of anticipatory triumph.

The prince, when he heard the story afterwards, felt that he had never
yet come across so wonderful a humorist, or such remarkable brilliancy
as was shown by this man; and yet if he had only known it, this story
was the oldest, stalest, and most worn-out yarn, and every drawing-room
in town was sick to death of it. It was only in the innocent Epanchin
household that it passed for a new and brilliant tale--as a sudden and
striking reminiscence of a splendid and talented man.
