"Won't do," he answered roughly. "Lost a woman overboard once, and as
much trouble about her as about all the men, drunk or sober, I've ever
carried. All women below, all women below, is the order! Besides,"
more amicably, as he saw by a ray of lantern-light that she was young
and comely, "it's wet, my dear, and going to be d--d wet, and as dark
as Wapping!"

"But I've a cloak," she petitioned, "if I sit quite still, and----"

A tall form loomed up at the captain's elbow. "This is the lady I am
looking for," the new-comer said. "It will be all right, Captain
Jones."

The captain turned sharply. "Oh, my lord," he said, "I didn't know;
but with petticoats and a dark night, blest if you know where you are!
I'm sure I beg the young lady's pardon. Quite right, my lord, quite
right!" With a rough salute he went forward and the darkness swallowed
him.

"Lord Audley?" Mary said. She spoke quietly, but to do so she had to
steady her voice.

"Yes," he replied. "I knew that you were crossing to-night, and as I
had to go over this week I chose this evening. I've reserved a cabin
for you."

"Oh, but," she remonstrated, "I don't think you should have done that!
I don't know that I can----"

"Afford it?" he said coolly. "Then--as it is a matter of some
shillings--your kinsman will presume to pay for it."

It was a small thing, and she let it pass. "But who told you," she
asked, "that I was crossing to-night?"

"The Princess. You don't feel, I suppose, that as you are crossing, it
was my duty to stay in France?"

"Oh no!" she protested.

"But you are not sure whether you are more pleased or more vexed?
Well, let me show you where your cabin is--it is the size of a
milliner's box, but by morning you will be glad of it, and that may
turn the scale. Moreover," as he led the way across the deck, "the
steward's boy, when he is not serving gin below, will serve tea above,
and at sea tea is not to be scorned. That's your number--7. And there
is the boy. Boy!" he called in a voice that ensured obedience, "Tea
and bread and butter for this lady in number 7 in an hour. See it is
there, my lad!"

She smiled. "I think the tea and bread and butter may turn the scale,"
she said.

"Right," he replied. "Then, as it is only eight o'clock, why should we
not sit in the shelter of this tarpaulin? I see that there are two
seats. They might have been put for us."

"Is it possible that they were?" she asked shrewdly. "Well, why not?"

She had no reason to give--and the temptation was great. Five minutes
before she had been the most lonely creature in the world. The parting
from Joséphine, the discomfort of the boat, the dark sea and the
darker horizon, the captain's rough words, had brought the tears to
her eyes. And then, in a moment, to be thought of, provided for,
kindly entreated, to be lapped in attentions as in a cloak--in very
fact, in another second a warm cloak was about her--who could expect
her to refuse this? Moreover, he was her kinsman; probably she owed it
to him that she was here.

At any rate she thought that it would be prudish to demur, and she
took one of the seats in the lee of the screen. Audley tucked the
cloak about her, and took the other. The light of a lantern fell on
their faces and the few passengers who still tramped the windy deck
could see the pair, and doubtless envied him their shelter. "Are you
comfortable?" he inquired--but before she could answer he whistled
softly.

"What is it?" Mary asked.

"Not much." He laughed to himself.

Then she saw coming along the deck towards them a man who had not
found his sea-legs. As he approached he took little runs, and now
brought up against the rail, now clutched at a stay. Mary knew the man
again. "He nearly missed the boat," she whispered.

"Did he?" her companion answered in the same tone. "Well, if he had
quite missed it, I'd have forgiven him. He is going to be ill, I'll
wager!"

When the man was close to them he reeled, and to save himself he
grasped the end of their screen. His eyes met theirs. He was past much
show of emotion, but his voice rose as he exclaimed, "Audley. Is that
you?"

"It is. We are in for a rough night, I'm afraid."

"And--pardon me," the stranger hesitated, peering at them, "is that
Miss Audley with you?"

"Yes," Mary said, much surprised.

"Oh!"

"This is Mr. Basset," Audley explained. Mary stared at the stranger.
The name conveyed nothing to her.

"I came to meet you," he said, speaking with difficulty, and now and
again casting a wild eye abroad as the deck heaved under him. "But I
expected to find you at the hotel, and I waited there until I nearly
missed the boat. Even then I felt that I ought to learn if you were on
board, and I came up to see."

"I am very much obliged to you," Mary answered politely, "but I am
quite comfortable, thank you. It is close below, and Lord Audley found
this seat for me. And I have a cabin."

"Oh yes!" he answered. "I think I will go down then if you--if you are
sure you want nothing."

"Nothing, thank you," Mary answered with decision.

"I think I--I'll go, then. Good-night!"

With that he went, making desperate tacks in the direction of the
companion. Unfortunately what he gained in speed he lost in dignity,
and before he reached the hatch Lord Audley gave way to laughter.

"Oh, don't!" Mary cried. "He will hear you. And it was kind of him to
look for me when he was not well."

But Audley only laughed the more. "You don't catch the full flavor of
it," he said. "He's come three hundred miles to meet you, and he's too
ill to do anything now he's here!"

"Three hundred miles to meet me!" she cried in astonishment.

"Every yard of it! Don't you know who he is? He's Peter Basset, your
uncle's nephew by marriage, who lives with him. He's come, or rather
your uncle has sent him, all the way from Stafford to meet you--and
he's gone to lie down! He's gone to lie down! There's a squire of
dames for you! Upon my honor, I never knew anything richer!"

And my lord's laughter broke out anew.




                              CHAPTER V

                          THE LONDON PACKET


Mary laughed with him, but she was not comfortable. What she had seen
of the stranger, a man plain in feature and ordinary in figure, one
whom the eye would not have remarked in a crowd, did not especially
commend him. And certainly he had not shown himself equal to a
difficult situation. But the effort he had made to come to her help
appealed to her generosity, and she was not sure how far she formed a
part of the comedy. So her laughter was from the lips only, and brief.
Then, "My uncle's nephew?" she asked thoughtfully.

"His wife's nephew. Your uncle married a Basset."

"But why did he send him to meet me?"

"For a simple reason--I should say that he had no one else to send.
Your uncle is not a man of many friends."

"I understood that some one would meet the boat in London," she said.
"But I expected a woman."

"I fancy the woman would be to seek," he replied. "And Basset is a
kind of tame cat at the Gatehouse. He lives there a part of the year,
though he has an old place of his own up the country. He's a
Staffordshire man born and bred, and I dare say a good fellow in his
way, but a dull dog! a dull dog! Are you sure that the wind does not
catch you?"

She said that she was very comfortable, and they were silent awhile,
listening to the monotonous slapping of a rope against the mast and
the wash of the waves as they surged past the beam. A single light at
the end of the breakwater shone in the darkness behind them. She
marked the light grow smaller and more distant, and her thoughts went
back to the convent school, to her father, to the third-floor where
for a time they had been together, to his care for her--feeble and
inefficient, to his illness. And a lump rose in her throat, her hands
gripped one another as she strove to hide her feelings. In her heart
she whispered a farewell. She was turning her back on her father's
grave. The last tendril which bound her to the old life was breaking.

The light vanished, and gradually the girl's reflections sought a new
channel. They turned from the past to the present, and dwelt on the
man beside her, who had not only thought of her comfort, who had not
only saved her from some hours of loneliness, but had probably wrought
this change in her life. This was the third time only that she had
seen him. Once, some days after that memorable evening, he had called
at the Hôtel Lambert, and her employer had sent for her. He had
greeted her courteously in the Princess's presence, had asked her
kindly if she had heard from England, and had led her to believe that
she would hear. And she remembered with a blush that the Princess had
looked from one to the other with a smile, and afterwards had had
another manner for her.

Meanwhile the man wondered what she was thinking, and waited for her
to give him the clue. But she was so long silent that his patience
wore thin. It was not for this, it was not to sit silent beside her,
that he had taken a night journey and secured these cosey seats.

"Well?" he said at last.

She turned to him, her eyes wet with tears. "It seems so strange," she
murmured, "to be leaving all and going into a world in which I know no
one."

"Except the head of your family."

"Except you! I suppose that I owe it to you that I am here?"

"I should be happy if I thought so," he replied, with careful
reticence. "But we set a stone rolling, we do not know where it falls.
You will soon learn--Basset will tell you, if I don't--that your uncle
and I are not on good terms. Therefore it is unlikely that he was
moved by what I said."

"But you said something?"

"If I did," he answered, smiling, "it was against the grain--who likes
to put his finger between the door and the jamb? And let me caution
you. Your uncle will not suffer meddling on my part, still less a
reminder of it. Therefore, as you are going to owe all to him, you
will do well to be silent about me."

She was sure that she owed all to him, and she might have said so, but
at that moment the boat changed its course and the full force of the
wind struck them. The salt spray whipped and stung their faces. Her
cloak flew out like a balloon, her scarf pennon-wise, the tarpaulin
flapped like some huge bird. He had to spring to the screen, to adjust
it to the new course, to secure and tuck in her cloak--and all in
haste, with exclamations and laughter, while Mary, sharing the joy of
the struggle, and braced by the sting of the salt wind, felt her heart
rise. How kind he was, and how strong. How he towered above ordinary
men. How safe she felt in his care.

When they were settled anew, she asked him to tell her something about
the Gatehouse.

"It's a lonely place," he said. "It is quite out of the world. I don't
know, indeed, how you will exist after the life you have led."

"The life I have led!" she protested. "But that is absurd! Though you
saw me in the Princess's salon, you know that my life had nothing in
common with hers. I was downstairs no more than three or four times,
and then merely to interpret. My life was spent between whitewashed
walls, on bare floors. I slept in a room with twenty children, ate
with forty--onion soup and thick tartines. The evening I saw you I
wore shoes which the maid lent me. And with all that I was thankful,
most thankful, to have such a refuge. The great people who met at the
Princess's----"

"And who thought that they were making history!" he laughed. "Did you
know that? Did you know that the Princess was looking to them to save
the last morsel of Poland?"

"No," she said. "I did not know. I am very ignorant. But if I were a
man, I should love to do things like that."

"I believe you would!" he replied. "Well, there are crusades in
England. Only I fear that you will not be in the way of them."

"And I am not a princess! But tell me, please, what are they?"

"You will not be long before you come upon one," he replied, a hint of
derision in his tone. "You will see a placard in the streets, '_Shall
the people's bread be taxed?_' Not quite so romantic as the
independence of Poland? But I can tell you that heads are quite as
likely to be broken over it."

"Surely," she said, "there can be only one answer to that."

"Just so," he replied dryly. "But what is the answer? The land
claims high prices that it may thrive; the towns claim cheap bread
that they may live. Each says that the country depends upon it.
'England self-supporting!' says one. 'England the workshop of the
world!' says the other."

"I begin to see."

"'The land is the strength of the country,' argues the squire. 'Down
with monopoly,' cries the cotton lord. Then each arms himself with a
sword lately forged and called 'Philanthropy,' and with that he
searches for chinks in the other's armor. 'See how factories work the
babes, drive the women underground, ruin the race,' shout the squires.
'Vote for the land and starvation wages,' shout the mill-owners."

"But does no one try to find the answer?" she asked timidly. "Try to
find out what is best for the people?"

"Ah!" he rejoined, "if by the people you mean the lower classes, they
cry, 'Give us not bread, but votes!' And the squires say that that is
what the traders who have just got votes don't mean to give them; and
so, to divert their attention, dangle cheap bread before their noses!"

Mary sighed. "I am afraid that I must give it up," she said. "I am so
ignorant."

"Well," he replied thoughtfully. "Many are puzzled which side to take,
and are waiting to see how the cat jumps. In the meantime every fence
is placarded with 'Speed the Plough!' on one side, and 'The Big Loaf!'
on the other. The first man you meet thinks the landlord a devourer of
widows' houses; to the next the mill-owner is an ogre grinding men's
bones to make his bread. Even at the Gatehouse I doubt if you will
escape the excitement, though there is not a field of wheat within a
mile of it!"

"To me it is like a new world," she said.

"Then, when you are in the new world," he replied, smiling as he rose,
"do not forget Columbus! But here is the lad to tell you that your tea
is ready."

He repented when Mary had left him that he had not made better use of
his time. It had been his purpose to make such an impression on the
girl as might be of use in the future, and he wondered why he had not
devoted himself more singly to this; why he had allowed minutes which
might have been given to intimate subjects to be wasted in a dry
discussion. But there was a quality in Mary that did not lightly
invite to gallantry--a gravity and a balance that, had he looked
closely into the matter, might have explained his laches.

And in fact he had builded better than he knew, for while he
reproached himself, Mary, safe within the tiny bathing machine which
the packet company called a cabin, was giving much thought to him. The
dip-candle, set within a horn lantern, threw its light on the one
comfortable object, the tea-tray, seated beside which she reviewed
what had happened, and found it all interesting; his meeting with her,
his thought for her, the glimpses he had given her of things beyond
the horizon of the convent school, even his diversion into politics.
He was not on good terms with her uncle, and it was unlikely that she
would see more of him. But she was sure that she would always remember
his appearance on the threshold of her new life, that she would always
recall with gratitude this crossing and the kindness which had lapped
her about and saved her from loneliness.

In her eyes he figured as one of the brilliant circle of the Hôtel
Lambert. For her he played a part in great movements and high
enterprises such as those which he had revealed to her. His light
treatment of them, his air of detachment, had, indeed, chilled her at
times; but these were perhaps natural in one who viewed from above and
from a distance the ills which it was his task to treat. How ignorant
he must think her! How remote from the plane on which he lived, the
standards by which he judged, the objects at which he aimed! Yet he
had stooped to explain things to her and to make them clear.

She spent an hour deep in thought, and, strange as the life of the
ship was to her, she was deaf to the creaking of the timbers, and the
surge of the waves as they swept past the beam. At intervals hoarse
orders, a rush of feet across the deck, the more regular tramp of rare
passengers, caught her attention, only to lose it as quickly. It was
late when she roused herself. She saw that the candle was burning low,
and she began to make her arrangements for the night.

Midway in them she paused, and colored, aware that she knew his tread
from the many that had passed. The footstep ceased. A hand tapped at
her door. "Yes?" she said.

"We shall be in the river by daybreak," Audley announced. "I thought
that you might like to come on deck early. You ought not to miss the
river from the Nore to the Pool."

"Thank you," she answered.

"You shouldn't miss it," he persisted. "Greenwich especially!"

"I shall be there," she replied. "It is very good of you. Good-night."

He went away. After all, he was the only man on board shod like a
gentleman; it had been odd if she had not known his step! And for
going on deck early, why should she not? Was she to miss Greenwich
because Lord Audley went to a good bootmaker?

So when Peter Basset, still pale and qualmish, came on deck in the
early morning, a little below the Pool, the first person he saw was
the girl whom he had come to escort. She was standing high above him
on the captain's bridge, her hands clasping the rail, her hair blown
about and shining golden in the sunshine. Lord Audley's stately form
towered above her. He was pointing out this and that, and they were
talking gaily; and now and again the captain spoke to them, and many
were looking at them. She did not see Basset; he was on the deck
below, standing amid the common crowd, and so he was free to look at
her as he pleased. He might be said not to have seen her before, and
what he saw now bewildered, nay, staggered him. Unwillingly, and to
please his uncle, he had come to meet a girl of whom they knew no more
than this, that, rescued from some backwater of Paris life, into which
a weak and shiftless father had plunged her, she had earned her
living, if she had earned it at all, in a dependent capacity. He had
looked to find her one of two things; either flashy and underbred,
with every fault an Englishman might consider French, or a nice
mixture of craft and servility. He had not been able to decide which
he would prefer.

Instead he saw a girl tall, slender, and slow of movement, with eyes
set under a fine width of brow and grave when they smiled, a chin
fuller than perfect beauty required, a mouth a little large, a perfect
nose. Auburn hair, thick and waving, drooped over each temple, and
framed a face as calm as it was fair. "Surely a pearl found on a
midden!" he thought. And as the thought passed through his mind, Mary
looked down. Her eyes roved for a moment over the crowded deck, where
some, like Basset, returned her gaze with interest, while others
sought their baggage or bawled for missing companions. He was not a
man, it has been said, to stand out in a crowd, and her eyes travelled
over him without seeing him. Audley spoke to her, she lifted her eyes,
she looked ashore again. But the unheeding glance which had not
deigned to know him stung Basset! He dubbed her, with all her beauty,
proud and hard. Still--to be such and to have sprung from such a life!
It was marvellous.

He knew nothing of the convent school with its hourly discipline
lasting through years. He did not guess that the obstinacy which had
been weakness in the father was strength in the child. Much less could
he divine that the improvidence of that father had become a beacon,
warning the daughter off the rocks which had been fatal to him! Mary
was no miracle, but neither was she proud or hard.

They had passed Erith, and Greenwich with its stately pile and formal
gardens glittering in the sunshine of an April morning. The ripple of
a westerly wind, meeting the flood, silvered the turbid surface. A
hundred wherries skimmed like water-flies hither and thither, long
lines of colliers fringed the wharves, tall China clippers forged
slowly up under a scrap of foresail, dumb barges deep laden with hay
or Barclay's Entire, moved mysteriously with the tide. On all sides
hoarse voices bawled orders or objurgations. Charmed with the gayety,
the movement, the color, Mary could not take her eyes from the scene.
The sunshine, the leap of life, the pulse of spring, moved in her
blood and put to flight the fears that had weighed on her at
nightfall. She told herself with elation that this was England, this
was her native land, this was her home.

Meanwhile Audley's mind took another direction. He reflected that in a
few minutes he must part from the girl, and must trust henceforth to
the impression he had made. For some hours he had scarcely given a
thought to Basset, but he recalled him now, and he searched for him in
the throng below. He found him at last, pressed against the rail
between a fat woman with a basket and a crying child. Their eyes met.
My lord glanced away, but he could not refrain from a smile as he
pictured the poor affair the other had made of his errand. And
Basset saw the smile and read its meaning, and though he was not
self--assertive, though he was, indeed, backward to a fault, anger ran
through his veins. To have travelled three hundred miles in order to
meet this girl, to have found her happy in another's company, and to
have accepted the second place--the position had vexed him even under
the qualms of illness. This morning, and since he had seen her, it
stirred in him an unwonted resentment. He d--d Audley under his
breath, disengaged himself from the basket which the fat woman was
thrusting into his ribs, lifted the child aside. He escaped below to
collect his effects.

But in a short time he recovered his temper. When the boat began to go
about in the crowded Pool and Mary reluctantly withdrew her eyes from
the White Tower, darkened by the smoke and the tragedies of twenty
generations, she found him awaiting them at the foot of the ladder. He
was still pale, and the girl's conscience smote her. For many hours
she had not given him a thought. "I hope you are better," she said
gently.

"Horrid thing, _mal de mer!_" remarked my lord, with a gleam of humor
in his eye.

"Thank you, I am quite right this morning," Basset answered.

"You go from Euston Grove, I suppose?"

"Yes. The morning train starts in a little over an hour."

No more was said, and they went ashore together. Audley, an old
traveller, and one whose height and presence gave weight to his
orders, saw to Mary's safety in the crowd, shielded her from touts and
tide-waiters, took the upper hand. He watched the aproned porters
disappearing with the baggage in the direction of the Custom House,
and a thought struck him. "I am sorry that my servant is not here," he
said. "He would see our things through without troubling us." His eyes
met Basset's.

Basset disdained to refuse. "I will do it," he said. He received the
keys and followed the baggage.

Audley looked at Mary and laughed. "I think you'll find him useful,"
he said. "Takes a hint and is not too forward."

"For shame!" she cried. "It is very good of him to go." But she could
not refrain from a smile.

"Well trained," Audley continued in a whimsical tone, "fetches and
carries, barks at the name of Peel and growls at the name of Cobden,
gives up a stick when required, could be taught to beg--by the right
person."

She laughed--she could not resist his manner. "But you are not very
kind," she said. "Please to call a--whatever we need. He shall not do
everything."

"Everything?" Lord Audley echoed. "He should do nothing," in a lower
tone, "if I had my way."

Mary blushed.




                              CHAPTER VI

                           FIELD AND FORGE


The window of the clumsy carriage was narrow, but Mary gazed through
it as if she could never see enough of the flying landscape, the
fields, the woods, the ivy-clad homes and red-roofed towns that passed
in procession before her. The emotions of those who journeyed for the
first time on a railway at a speed four times as great as that of the
swiftest High-flier that ever devoured the road are forgotten by this
generation. But they were vivid. The thing was a miracle. And though
by this time men had ceased to believe that he who passed through the
air at sixty miles an hour must of necessity cease to breathe, the
novice still felt that he could never tire of the panorama so swiftly
unrolled before him.

And it was not only wonder, it was admiration that held Mary chained
to the window. Her infancy had been spent in a drab London street, her
early youth in the heart of a Paris which was still gloomy and
mediæval. Some beautiful things she had seen on fête days, the
bend of the river at Meudon or St. Germain, and once the Forest
of Fontainebleau; on Sundays the Bois. But the smiling English
meadows, the gray towers of village churches, the parks and lawns of
manor-houses, the canals with their lines of painted barges, and here
and there a gay packet boat--she drank in the beauty of these, and
more than once her eyes grew dim. For a time Basset, seated in the
opposite corner, did not exist for her; while he, behind the _Morning
Chronicle_, made his observations and took note of her at his leisure.
The longer he looked the more he marvelled.

He asked himself with amusement what John Audley would think of her
when he, too, should see her. He anticipated the old man's surprise on
finding her so remote from their preconceived ideas of her. He
wondered what she would think of John Audley.

And while he pondered, and now scanned his paper without reading it,
and now stole another glance at her, he steeled himself against her.
She might not have been to blame, it might not have been her fault;
but, between them, the two on the boat had put him in his place and he
could not forget it. He had cut a poor figure, and he resented it. He
foresaw that in the future she would be dependent on him for society,
and he would be a fool if he then forgot the lesson he had learned.
She had a good face, but probably her up-bringing had been anything
but good. Probably it had taught her to make the most of the moment
and of the man of the moment, and he would be foolish if he let her
amuse herself with him. He had seen in what light she viewed him when
other game was afoot, and he would deserve the worst if he did not
remember this.

Presently an embankment cut off the view, and she withdrew her eyes
from the window. In her turn she took the measure of her companion. It
seemed to her that his face was too thoughtful for his years, and that
his figure was insignificant. The eye which had accustomed itself to
Lord Audley's port and air found Basset slight and almost mean. She
smiled as she recalled the skill with which my lord had set him aside
and made use of him.

Still, he was a part of the life to which she was hastening, and
curiosity stirred in her. He was in possession, he was in close
relations with her uncle, he knew many things which she was anxious to
know. Much of her comfort might depend on him. Presently she asked him
what her uncle was like.

"You will see for yourself in a few hours," he replied, his tone cold
and almost ungracious. "Did not Lord Audley describe him?"

"No. And you seem," with a faint smile, "to be equally on your guard,
Mr. Basset."

"Not at all," he retorted. "But I think it better to leave you to
judge for yourself. I have lived too near to Mr. Audley to--to
criticise him."

She colored.

"Let me give you one hint, however," he continued in the same dry
tone; "you will be wise not to mention Lord Audley to him. They are
not on good terms."

"I am sorry."

He shrugged his shoulders. "It cannot be said to be unnatural, after
what has happened."

She considered this. "What has happened?" she asked after a pause.

"Well, the claim to the peerage, if nothing else----"

"What claim?" she asked. "Whose claim? What peerage? I am quite in the
dark."

He stared. He did not believe her. "Your uncle's claim," he said
curtly. Then as she still looked a question, "You must know," he
continued, "that your uncle claimed the title which Lord Audley bears,
and the property which goes with it. And that the decision was only
given against him three months ago."

"I know nothing of it," she said. "I never heard of the claim."

"Really?" he replied. He hardly deigned to veil his incredulity. "Yet
if your uncle had succeeded you were the next heir."

"I?"

"Yes, you."

Then her face shook his unbelief. She turned slowly and painfully red.
"Is it possible?" she said. "You are not playing with me?"

"Certainly I am not. Do you mean that Lord Audley never told you that?
Never told you that you were interested?"

"Never! He only told me that he was not on good terms with my uncle,
and that for that reason he would leave me to learn the rest at the
Gatehouse."

"Well, that was right," Basset answered. "It is as well, since you
have to live with Mr. Audley, that you should not be prejudiced
against him."

"No doubt," she said dryly. "But I do not understand why he did not
answer my letters."

"Did you write to him?"

"Twice." She was going to explain the circumstances, but she
refrained. Why appeal to the sympathies of one who seemed so cold, so
distant, so indifferent?

"He cannot have had the letters," Basset decided after a pause.

"Then how did he come to write to me at last?"

"Lord Audley sent your address to him."

"Ah!" she said. "I supposed so." With an air of finality she turned to
the window, and for some time she was silent. Her mind had much upon
which to work.

She was silent for so long that before more was said they were running
through the outskirts of Birmingham, and Mary awoke with a shock to
another and sadder side of England. In place of parks and homesteads
she saw the England of the workers--workers at that time exploited to
the utmost in pursuance of a theory of economy that heeded only the
wealth of nations, and placed on that wealth the narrowest meaning.
They passed across squalid streets, built in haste to meet the needs
of new factories, under tall chimneys the smoke of which darkened the
sky without hindrance, by vile courts, airless and almost sunless.
They looked down on sallow children whose only playground was the
street and whose only school-bell was the whistle that summoned them
at dawn to premature toil. Haggard women sat on doorsteps with puling
babes in their arms. Lines of men, whose pallor peered through the
grime, propped the walls, or gazed with apathy at the train. For a few
minutes Mary forgot not only her own hopes and fears, but the
aloofness and even the presence of her companion. When they came to a
standstill in the station, where they had to change on to the Grand
Junction Railway, Basset had to speak twice before she understood that
he wished her to leave the carriage.

"What a dreadful place!" she exclaimed.

"Well, it is not beautiful," Basset admitted. "One does not look for
beauty in Birmingham and the Black Country."

He got her some tea, and marshalled her carefully to the upper line.
But his answer had jarred upon her, and when they were again seated,
Mary kept her thoughts to herself. Beyond Birmingham their route
skirted towns rather than passed through them, but she saw enough to
deepen the impression which the lanes and alleys of that place had
made upon her. The sun had set and the cold evening light revealed in
all their meanness the rows of naked cottages, the heaps of slag and
cinders, the starveling horses that stood with hanging heads on the
dreary lands. As darkness fell, fires shone out here and there, and
threw into Dantesque relief the dark forms of half-naked men toiling
with fury to feed the flames. The change which an hour had made in all
she saw seemed appalling to the girl; it filled her with awe and
sadness. Here, so near the paradise of the country and the plough, was
the Inferno of the town, the forge, the pit! Here, in place of the
thatched cottage and the ruddy faces, were squalor and sunken cheeks
and misery and dearth.

She thought of the question which Lord Audley had raised twenty-four
hours before, and which he had told her was racking the minds of
men--should food be taxed? And she fancied that there was, there could
be, but one answer. These toiling masses, these slaves of the hammer
and the pick, must be fed, and, surely, so fed that a margin, however
small, however meagre, might be saved out of which to better their
sordid lot.

"We call this the Black Country," Basset explained, feeling the
silence irksome. After all, she was in his charge, in a way she was
his guest. He ought to amuse her.

"It is well named," she answered. "Is there anything in England worse
than this?"

"Well, round Hales Owen and Dudley," he rejoined, "it may be worse.
And at Cradley Heath it may be rougher. More women and children are
employed in the pits; and where women make chains--well, it's pretty
bad."

She had spoken dryly to hide her feelings. He replied in a tone as
matter-of-fact, through lack of feeling. For this he was not so much
to blame as she fancied, for that which horrified her was to him an
everyday matter, one of the facts of life with which he had been
familiar from boyhood. But she did not understand this. She judged him
and condemned him. She did not speak again.

By and by, "We shall be at Penkridge in twenty minutes," he said.
"After that a nine-miles drive will take us to the Gatehouse, and your
journey will be over. But I fear that you will find the life quiet
after Paris."

"I was very quiet in Paris."

"But you were in a large house."

"I was at the Princess Czartoriski's."

"Of course. I suppose it was there that you met Lord Audley?"

"Yes."

"Well, after that kind of life, I am afraid that the Gatehouse will
have few charms for you. It is very remote, very lonely."

She cut him short with impatience, the color rising to her face. "I
thought you understood," she said, "that I was in the Princess's house
as a governess? It was my business to take care of a number of
children, to eat with them, to sleep with them, to see that they
washed their hands and kept their hair clean. That was my position,
Mr. Basset. I do not wish it to be misunderstood."

"But if that were so," he stammered, "how did you----"

"Meet Lord Audley," she replied. "Very simply. Once or twice the
Princess ordered me to descend to the salon to interpret. On one of
these occasions Lord Audley saw me and learned--who I was."

"Indeed," he said. "I see." Perhaps he had had it in his mind to test
her and the truth of Audley's letter, which nothing in her or in my
lord's conduct seemed to confirm. He did not know if this had been in
his mind, but in any case the result silenced him. She was either very
honest or very clever. Many girls, he knew, would have slurred over
the facts, and not a few would have boasted of the Princess's
friendship and the Princess's society, and the Princess's hôtel, and
brought up her name a dozen times a day.

She is very clever, he thought, or she is--good. But for the moment he
steeled himself against the latter opinion.

No other travellers alighted at Penkridge, and he went away to claim
the baggage, while she waited, cold and depressed, on the little
platform which, lit by a single oil lamp, looked down on a dim
churchyard. Dusk was passing into night, and the wind, sweeping across
the flat, whipped her skirts and chilled her blood. Her courage sank.
A light or two betrayed the nearness of the town, but in every other
direction dull lines of willows or pale stretches of water ran into
the night.

Five minutes before she had resented Basset's company, now she was
glad to see him return. He led the way to the road in silence. "The
carriage is late," he muttered, but even as he spoke the quick tramp
of a pair of horses pushed to speed broke on them, lights appeared, a
moment later a fly pulled up beside them and turned. "You are late,"
Basset said.

"There!" the man replied. "Minutes might be guineas since trains came
in, dang 'em! Give me the days when five minutes made neither man nor
mouse, and gentry kept their own time."

"Well, let us get off now."

"I ask no better, Squire. Please yourself and you'll please me."

When they were shut in, Basset laughed. "Stafford manners!" he said.
"You'll become used to them!"

"Is this my uncle's carriage?" she asked.

"No," he replied, smiling in the darkness. "He does not keep one."

She said no more. Though she could not see him, her shoulder touched
his, and his nearness and the darkness in which they sat troubled her,
though she was not timid. They rode thus for a minute or two, then
trundled through a narrow street, dimly lit by shop windows; again
they were in the dark and the country. Presently the pace dropped to a
walk as they began to ascend.

She fancied, peering out on her side, that they were winding up
through woods. Branches swept the sides of the carriage. They jolted
into ruts and jolted out of them. By and by they were clear of the
trees and the road seemed to be better. The moon, newly risen, showed
her a dreary upland, bare and endless, here dotted with the dark
stumps of trees, there of a deeper black as if fire had swept over it
and scarred it. They met no one, saw no sign of habitation. To the
girl, accustomed all her life to streets and towns, the place seemed
infinitely desolate--a place of solitude and witches and terror and
midnight murder.

"What is this?" she asked, shivering.

"This is the Great Chase," he said. "Riddsley, on the farther side, is
our nearest town, but since the railway was opened we use Penkridge
Station."

His practical tone steadied her, but she was tired, and the loneliness
which she had felt while she waited on the bleak platform weighed
heavily on her. To what was she going? How would her uncle receive
her? This dreary landscape, the gaunt signpost that looked like a
gibbet and might have been one, the skeleton trees that raised bare
arms to heaven, the scream of a dying rabbit, all added to the
depression of the moment. She was glad when at last the carriage
stopped at a gate. Basset alighted and opened the gate. He stepped in
again, they went on. There were now shadowy trees about them, sparsely
set. They jolted unevenly over turf.

"Are we there?" she asked, a tremor in her voice.

"Very nearly," he said. "Another mile and we shall be there. This is
Beaudelays Park."

She called pride to her aid, and he did not guess--for all day he had
marked her self-possession--that she was trembling. Vainly she told
herself that she was foolish, that nothing could happen to her,
nothing that mattered. What, after all, was a cold reception, what was
her uncle's frown beside the poverty and the hazards from which she
had escaped? Vainly she reassured herself; she could not still the
rapid beating of her heart.

He might have said a word to cheer her. But he did not know that she
was suffering, and he said no word. She came near to hating him for
his stolidity and his silence. He was inhuman! A block!

She peered through the misty glass, striving to see what was before
them. But she could make out no more than the dark limbs of trees, and
now and then a trunk, which shone as the light of the lamp slipped
over it, and as quickly vanished. Suddenly they shot from turf to hard
road, passed through an open gateway, for an instant the lamp on her
side showed a grotesque pillar--they wheeled, they stopped. Within a
few feet of her a door stood open, and in the doorway a girl held a
lantern aloft in one hand, and with the other screened her eyes from
the light.




                             CHAPTER VII

                           MR. JOHN AUDLEY


An hour later Basset was seated on one side of a wide hearth,
on the other John Audley faced him. The library in which they sat was
the room which Basset loved best in the world. It was a room of
silence and large spaces, and except where four windows, tall and
narrow, broke one wall, it was lined high with the companions of
silence--books. The ceiling was of black oak, adorned at the crossings
of the joists and beams with emblems, butterflies, and Stafford knots
and the like, once bright with color, and still soberly rich. A
five-sided bay enlarged each of the two inner corners of the
room and broke the outlines. One of these bays shrined a window,
four-mullioned, the other a spiral staircase. An air of comfort and
stateliness pervaded the whole; here the great scutcheon over the
mantel, there the smaller coats on the chair-backs blended their or
and gules with the hues of old rugs and the dun bindings of old
folios. There were books on the four or five tables, and books on the
Cromwell chairs; and charts and deeds, antique weapons and silver
pieces, all the tools and toys of the antiquary, lay broadcast.
Against the door hung a blazoned pedigree of the Audleys of
Beaudelays. It was six feet long and dull with age.

But Basset, as he faced his companion, was not thinking of the room,
or of the pursuits with which it was connected in his mind, and which,
more than affection and habit, bound him to John Audley. He moved
restlessly in his chair, then stretched his legs to meet the glow of
the wood fire. "All the same," he said, "I think you would have done
well to see her to-night, sir."

"Pooh! pooh!" John Audley answered with lazy good humor. "Why? It
doesn't matter what I think of her or she thinks of me. It's what
Peter thinks of Mary and Mary thinks of Peter that matters. That's
what matters!" He chuckled as he marked the other's annoyance. "She is
a beauty, is she?"

"I didn't say so."

"But you think it. You don't deceive me at this time of day. And
stand-off, is she? That's for the marines and innocent young fellows
like you who think women angels. I'll be bound that she's her mother's
daughter, and knows her value and will see that she fetches it!
Trading blood will out!"

To the eye that looked and glanced away John Audley, lolling in his
chair, in a quilted dressing-gown with silk facings, was a plump and
pleasant figure. His face was fresh-colored, and would have been
comely if the cheeks had not been a little pendulous. His hair was
fine and white and he wore it long, and his hands were shapely and
well cared for. As he said his last word he poured a little brandy
into a glass and filled it up with water. "Here's to the wooing that's
not long adoing!" he said, his eyes twinkling. He seemed to take a
pleasure in annoying the other.

He was so far successful that Basset swore softly. "It's silly to talk
like that," he said, "when I have hardly known the girl twenty-four
hours and have scarcely said ten times as many words to her."

"But you're going to say a good many more words to her!" Audley
retorted, grinning. "Sweet, pretty words, my boy! But there, there,"
he continued, veering between an elfish desire to tease and a desire
equally strong to bring the other to his way of thinking. "I'm only
joking. I know you'll never let that devil have his way! You'll never
leave the course open for _him!_ I know that. But there's no hurry!
There's no hurry. Though, lord, how I sweated when I read his letter!
I had never a wink of sleep the night after."

"I don't suppose that he's given a thought to her in that way," Basset
answered. "Why should he?"

John Audley leant forward, and his face underwent a remarkable change.
It became a pale, heavy mask, out of which his eyes gleamed, small and
malevolent. "Don't talk like a fool!" he said harshly. "Of course he
means it. And if she's fool enough all my plans, all my pains, all my
rights--and once you come to your senses and help me I shall have my
rights--all, all, all will go for nothing. For nothing!" He sank back
in his chair. "There! now you've excited me. You've excited me, and
you know that I can't bear excitement!" His hand groped feebly for his
glass, and he raised it to his lips. He gasped once or twice. The
color came back to his face.

"I am sorry," Basset said.

"Ay, ay. But be a good lad. Be a good lad. Make up your mind to help
me at the Great House."

Basset shook his head.

"To help me, and twenty-four hours--only twenty-four hours, man--may
make all the difference! All the difference in the world to me."

"I have told you my views about it," Basset said doggedly. He shifted
uneasily in his chair. "I cannot do it, sir, and I won't."

John Audley groaned. "Well, well!" he answered. "I'll say no more now.
I'll say no more now. When you and she have made it up"--in vain
Basset shook his head--"you'll see the question in another light. Ay,
believe me, you will. It'll be your business then, and your interest,
and nothing venture, nothing win! You'll see it differently. You'll
help the old man to his rights then."

Basset shrugged his shoulders, but thought it useless to protest. The
other sighed once or twice and was silent also. At length, "You never
told me that you had heard from her," Basset said.

"That I'd----" John Audley broke off. "What is it, Toft?" he asked
over his shoulder.

A man-servant, tall, thin, lantern-jawed, had entered unseen. "I came
to see if you wanted anything more, sir?" he said.

"Nothing, nothing, Toft. Good-night!" He spoke impatiently, and he
watched the man out before he went on. Then, "Perhaps I heard from
her, perhaps I didn't," he said. "It's some time ago. What of it?"

"She was in great distress when she wrote."

John Audley raised his eyebrows. "What of it!" he repeated.
"She was that woman's daughter. When Peter married a tradesman's
daughter--married a----" He did not continue. His thoughts trickled
away into silence. The matter was not worthy of his attention.

But by and by he roused himself. "You've ridiculous scruples," he
said. "Absurd scruples. But," briskly, "there's that much of good in
this girl that I think she'll put an end to them. You must brighten
up, my lad, and spark it a little! You're too grave."

"Damn!" said Basset. "For God's sake, don't begin it all again. I've
told you that I've not the least intention----"

"She'll see to that if she's what I think her," John Audley retorted
cheerfully. "If she's her mother's daughter! But very well, very well!
We'll change the subject. I've been working at the Feathers--the
Prince's Feathers."

"Have you gone any farther?" Basset asked, forcing an interest which
would have been ready enough at another time.

"I might have, but I had a visitor."

Visitors were rare at the Gatehouse, and Basset wondered. "Who was
it?" he asked.

"Bagenal the maltster from Riddsley. He came about some political
rubbish. Some trouble they are having with Mottisfont. D--n
Mottisfont! What do I care about him? They think he isn't running
straight--that he's going in for corn-law repeal. And Bagenal and the
other fools think that that will be the ruin of the town."

"But Mottisfont is a Tory," Basset objected.

"So is Peel. They are both in Bagenal's bad books. Bagenal is sure
that Peel is going back to the cotton people he came from. Spinning
Jenny spinning round again!"

"I see."

"I asked him," Audley continued, rubbing his knees with sly enjoyment,
"what Stubbs the lawyer was doing about it. He's the party manager.
Why didn't he come to me?"

Basset smiled. "What did he say to that?"

"Hummed and hawed. At last he said that owing to Stubbs's connection
with--you know who--it was thought that he was not the right person to
come to me. So I asked him what Stubbs's employer was going to do
about it."

"Ah!"

"He didn't know what to say to that, the ass! Thought I should go the
other way, you see. So I told him"--John Audley laughed maliciously as
he spoke--"that, for the landed interest, the law had taken away my
land, and, for politics, I would not give a d--n for either party in a
country where men did not get their rights! Lord! how he looked!"

"Well, you didn't hide your feelings."

"Why should I?" John Audley asked cheerfully. "What will they do for
me? Nothing. Will they move a finger to right me? No. Then a plague on
both their houses!" He snapped his fingers in schoolboy fashion and
rose to his feet. He lit a candle, taking a light from the fire with a
spill. "I am going to bed now, Peter. Unless----" he paused, the
candlestick in his hand, and gazed fixedly at his companion. "Lord,
man, what we could do in two or three hours! In two or three hours.
This very night!"

"I've told you that I will have nothing to do with it!" Basset
repeated.

John Audley sighed, and removing his eyes, poked the wick of the
candle with the snuffers. "Well," he said, "good-night. We must look
to bright eyes and red lips to convert you. What a man won't do for
another he will do for himself, Peter. Good-night."

Left alone, Basset stared fretfully at the fire. It was not the first
time by scores that John Audley had tried him and driven him almost
beyond bearing. But habit is a strong tie, and a common taste is a
bond even stronger. In this room, and from the elder man, Basset had
learned to trace a genealogy, to read a coat, to know a bar from a
bend, to discourse of badges and collars under the guidance of the
learned Anstie or the ingenious Le Neve. There he had spent hours
flitting from book to book and chart to chart in the pursuit, as
thrilling while it lasted as any fox-chase, of some family link, the
origin of this, the end of that, a thing of value only to those who
sought it, but to them all-important. He could recall many a day so
spent while rain lashed the tall mullioned windows or sunlight flooded
the window-seat in the bay; and these days had endeared to him every
nook in the library from the folio shelves in the shadowy corner under
the staircase to the cosey table near the hearth which was called "Mr.
Basset's," and enshrined in a long drawer a tree of the Bassets of
Blore.

For he as well as Audley came of an ancient and shrunken stock. He
also could count among his forbears men who had fought at Blore Heath
and Towton, or had escaped by a neck from the ruin of the Gunpowder
Plot. So he had fallen early under the spell of the elder man's
pursuits, and, still young, had learned from him to live in the past.
Later the romantic solitude of the Gatehouse, where he had spent more
of the last six years than in his own house at Blore, had confirmed
him in the habit.

Under the surface, however, the two men remained singularly unlike.
While a fixed idea had narrowed John Audley's vision to the inhuman,
the younger man, under a dry and reserved exterior--he was shy, and
his undrained acres, his twelve hundred a year, poorly supported an
ancient name--was not only human, but in his way was something of an
idealist. He dreamed dreams, he had his secret aspirations, at times
ambition of the higher kind stirred in him, he planned plans and
another life than this. But always--this was a thing inbred in him--he
put forward the commonplace, as the cuttle-fish sheds ink, and hid
nothing so shyly as the visions which he had done nothing to make
real. On those about him he made no deep impression, though from one
border of Staffordshire to the other his birth won respect. Politics
viewed as a game, and a selfish game, had no attraction for him.
Quarter Sessions and the Bench struck no spark from him. At the Races
and the County Ball richer men outshone him. But given something to
touch his heart and fire his ambition, he had qualities. He might
still show himself in another light.

Something of this, for no reason that he could imagine, some feeling
of regret for past opportunities, passed through his mind as he sat
fretting over John Audley's folly. But after a time he roused himself
and became aware that he was tired; and he rose and lit a candle. He
pushed back the smouldering logs and slowly and methodically he put
out the lights. He gave a last thought to John Audley. "There was
always one maggot in his head," he muttered, "now there's a second.
What I would not do to please him, he thinks I shall do to please
another! Well, he does not know her yet!"

He went to bed.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                            THE GATEHOUSE


It is within the bounds of imagination that death may make no greater
change in our inner selves than is wrought at times by a new mood or
another outlook. When Mary, an hour before the world was astir on the
morning after her arrival, let herself out of the Gatehouse, and from
its threshold as from a ledge saw the broad valley of the Trent
stretched before her in all the beauty of a May morning, her alarm of
the past night seemed incredible. At her feet a sharp slope, clothed
in gorse and shrub, fell away to meet the plain. It sank no more than
a couple of hundred feet, but this was enough to enable her to follow
the silver streak of the river winding afar between park and coppice
and under many a church tower. Away to the right she could see the
three graceful spires of Lichfield, and southward, where an opal haze
closed the prospect, she could imagine the fringe of the Black
Country, made beautiful by distance.

In sober fact few parts of England are less inviting than the low
lands of Staffordshire, when the spring floods cover them or the fogs
of autumn cling to the cold soil. But in spring, when larks soar above
them and tall, lop-sided elms outline the fields, they have their
beauty; and Mary gazed long at the fair prospect before she turned her
back on it and looked at the house that was fated to be her home.

It was what its name signified, a gatehouse; yet by turns it could be
a sombre and a charming thing. Some Audley of noble ideas, a man long
dead, had built it to be the entrance to his demesne. The park wall,
overhung by trees, still ran right and left from it, but the road
which had once passed through the archway now slid humbly aside and
entered the park by a field gate. A wide-latticed Tudor tower, rising
two stories above the arch and turreted at the four corners, formed
the middle. It was buttressed on either hand by a lower building,
flush with it and of about the same width. The tower was of yellowish
stone, the wings were faced with stained stucco. Right and left of the
whole a plot of shrubs masked on the one hand the stables, on the
other the kitchens--modern blocks set back to such a distance that
each touched the old part at a corner only.

He who had planned the building had set it cunningly on the brow of
the Great Chase, so that, viewed from the vale, it rose against the
skyline. On dark days it broke the fringe of woodland and stood up,
gloomy and forbidding, the portal of a Doubting Castle. On bright
days, with its hundred diamond panes a-glitter in the sunshine, it
seemed to be the porch of a fairy palace, the silent home of some
Sleeping Beauty. At all times it imposed itself upon men below and
spoke of something beyond, something unseen, greater, mysterious.

To Mary Audley, who saw it at its best, the very stains of the plaster
glorified by the morning light, it was a thing of joy. She fancied
that to live behind those ancient mullioned windows, to look out
morning and evening on that spacious landscape, to feel the bustle of
the world so remote, must in itself be happiness. For a time she could
not turn from it.

But presently the desire to explore her new surroundings seized her
and she re-entered the house. A glance at the groined roof of the
hall--many a gallant horseman had ridden under it in his time--proved
that it was merely the archway closed and fitted with a small door and
window at either end. She unlocked the farther door and passed into a
paved court, in which the grass grew between the worn flags. In the
stables on the left a dog whined. The kitchens were on the other hand,
and before her an opening flanked by tall heraldic beasts broke a low
wall, built of moss-grown brick. She ventured through it and uttered a
cry of delight.

Near at hand, under cover of a vast chestnut tree, were traces of
domestic labor: a grindstone, a saw-pit, a woodpile, coops with
clucking hens. But beyond these the sward, faintly lined at first with
ruts, stretched away into forest glades, bordered here by giant oaks
brown in bud, there by the yellowish-green of beech trees. In the
foreground lay patches of gorse, and in places an ancient thorn, riven
and half prostrate, crowned the russet of last year's bracken with a
splash of cream. Heedless of the spectator, rabbits sat making their
toilet, and from every brake birds filled the air with a riot of song.

To one who had seen little but the streets of Paris, more sordid then
than now, the scene was charming. Mary's eyes filled, her heart
swelled. Ah, what a home was here! She had espied on her journey many
a nook and sheltered dell, but nothing that could vie with this!
Heedless of her thin shoes, with no more than a handkerchief on her
head, she strayed on and on. By and by a track, faintly marked, led
her to the left. A little farther, and old trees fell into line on
either hand, as if in days long gone, before age thinned their ranks,
they had formed an avenue.

For a time she sat musing on a fallen trunk, then the hawthorn that a
few paces away perfumed the spring air moved her to gather an armful
of it. She forgot that time was passing, almost she forgot that she
had not breakfasted, and she might have been nearly a mile from the
Gatehouse when she was startled by a faint hail that seemed to come
from behind her. She looked back and saw Basset coming after her.

He, too, was hatless--he had set off in haste--and he was out of
breath. She turned with concern to meet him. "Am I very late, Mr.
Basset?" she asked, her conscience pricking her. What if this first
morning she had broken the rules?

"Oh no," he said. And then, "You've not been farther than this?"

"No. I am afraid my uncle is waiting?"

"Oh no. He breakfasts in his own room. But Etruria told me that
you had gone this way, and I followed. I see that you are not
empty-handed."

"No." And she thrust the great bunch of may under his nose--who would
not have been gay, who would not have lost her reserve in such a
scene, on such a morning? "Isn't it fresh? Isn't it delicious?"

As he stooped to the flowers his eyes met hers smiling through the
hawthorn sprays, and he saw her as he had not seen her before. Her
gravity had left her. Spring laughed in her eyes, youth fluttered in
the tendrils of her hair, she was the soul of May. And what she had
found of beauty in the woodland, of music in the larks' songs, of
perfume in the blossoms, of freshness in the morning, the man found in
her; and a shock, never to be forgotten, ran through him. He did not
speak. He smelled the hawthorn in silence.

But a few seconds later--as men reckon time--he took note of his
feelings, and he was startled. He had not been prepared to like her,
we know; many things had armed him against her. But before the
witchery of her morning face, the challenge of her laughing eyes, he
awoke to the fact that he was in danger. He had to own that if he must
live beside her day by day and would maintain his indifference, he
must steel himself. He must keep his first impressions of her always
before him, and be careful. And be very careful--if even that might
avail.

For a hundred paces he walked at her side, listening without knowing
what she said. Then his coolness returned, and when she asked him why
he had come after her without his hat he was ready.

"I had better tell you," he answered, "this path is little used. It
leads to the Great House, and your uncle, owing to his quarrel with
Lord Audley, does not like any one to go farther in that direction
than the Yew Tree Walk. You can see the Walk from here--the yews mark
the entrance to the gardens. I thought that it would be unfortunate if
you began by displeasing him, and I came after you."

"It was very good of you," she said. Her face was not gay now. "Does
Lord Audley live there--when he is at home?"

"No one lives there," he explained soberly. "No one has lived there
for three generations. It's a ruin--I was going to say, a nightmare.
The greater part of the house was burnt down in a carouse held to
celebrate the accession of George the Third. The Audley of that day
rebuilt it on a great scale, but before it was finished he gave a
housewarming, at which his only son quarrelled with a guest. The two
fought at daybreak, and the son was killed beside the old Butterfly in
the Yew Walk--you will see the spot some day. The father sent away the
builders and never looked up again. He diverted much of his property,
and a cousin came into the remainder and the title, but the house was
never finished, the windows in the new part were never glazed. In the
old part some furniture and tapestry decay; in the new are only bats
and dust and owls. So it has stood for eighty years, vacant in the
midst of neglected gardens. In the sunlight it is one of the most
dreary things you can imagine. By moonlight it is better, but
unspeakably melancholy."

"How dreadful," she said in a low voice. "I almost wish, Mr. Basset,
that you had not told me. They say in France that if you see the dead
without touching them, you dream of them. I feel like that about the
house."

It crossed his mind that she was talking for effect. "It is only a
house after all," he said.

"But our house," with a touch of pride. Then, "What are those?"
she asked, pointing to the gray shapeless beasts, time-worn and
weather-stained, that flanked the entrance to the courtyard.

"They are, or once were, Butterflies, the badge of the Audleys. These
hold shields. You will see the Butterflies in many places in the
Gatehouse. You will find them with men's faces and sometimes with a
fret on the wings. Your uncle says that they are not butterflies, but
moths, that have eaten the Audley fortunes."

It was a thought that matched the picture he had drawn of the deserted
house, and Mary felt that the morning had lost its brightness. But not
for long. Basset led her into a room on the right of the hall, and the
sight drew from her a cry of pleasure. On three sides the dark
wainscot rose eight feet from the floor; above, the walls were
whitewashed to the ceiling and broken by dim portraits, on stretchers
and without frames. On the fourth side where the panelling divided the
room from a serving-room, once part of it, it rose to the ceiling. The
stone hearth, the iron dogs, the matted floor, the heavy chairs and
oak table, all were dark and plain and increased the austerity of the
room.

At the end of the table places were laid for three, and Toft, who had
set on the breakfast, was fixing the kettle amid the burning logs.

"Is Mr. Audley coming down?" Basset asked.

"He bade me lay for him," Toft replied dryly. "I doubt if he will
come. You had better begin, sir. The young lady," with a searching
look at her, "must want her breakfast."

"I am afraid I do," Mary confessed.

"Yes, we will begin," Basset said. He invited her to make the tea.

When they were seated, "You like the room?"

"I love it," she answered.

"So do I," he rejoined, more soberly. "The panelling is linen--pattern
of the fifteenth century--you see the folds? It was saved from the old
house. I am glad you like it."

"I love it," she said again. But after that she grew thoughtful, and
during the rest of the meal she said little. She was thinking of what
was before her; of the unknown uncle, whose bread she was eating, and
upon whom she was going to be dependent. What would he be like? How
would he receive her? And why was every one so reticent about him--so
reticent that he was beginning to be something of an ogre to her? When
Toft presently appeared and said that Mr. Audley was in the library
and would see her when she was ready, she lost color. But she answered
the man with self-possession, asked quietly where the library was, and
had not Basset's eyes been on her face he would have had no notion
that she was troubled.

As it was, he waited for her to avow her misgiving--he was prepared to
encourage her. But she said nothing.

None the less, at the last moment, with her hand on the door of the
library, she hesitated. It was not so much fear of the unknown
relative whom she was going to see that drove the blood from her
cheek, as the knowledge that for her everything depended upon him. Her
new home, its peace, its age, its woodland surroundings, fascinated
her. It promised her not only content, but happiness. But as her stay
in it hung upon John Audley's will, so her pleasure in it, and her
enjoyment of it, depended upon the relations between them. What would
they be? How would he receive her? What would he be like? At last she
called up her courage, turned the handle, and entered the library.

For a moment she saw no one. The great room, with its distances and
its harmonious litter, appeared to be empty. Then, "Mary, my dear,"
said a pleasant voice, "welcome to the Gatehouse!" And John Audley
rose from his seat at a distant table and came towards her.

The notion which she had formed of him vanished in a twinkling, and
with it her fears. She saw before her an elderly gentleman, plump
and kindly, who walked with a short tripping step, and wore the
swallow-tailed coat with gilt buttons which the frock-coat had
displaced. He took her hand with a smile, kissed her on the forehead,
and led her to a chair placed beside his own. He sat for a moment
holding her hand and looking at her.

"Yes, I see the likeness," he said, after a moment's contemplation.
"But, my dear, how is this? There are tears in your eyes, and you
tremble."

"I think," she said, "I was a little afraid of you, sir."

"Well, you are not afraid now," he replied cheerfully. "And you won't
be again. You won't be again. My dear, welcome once more to the
Gatehouse. I hope that it may be your home until another is offered
you. Things came between your father and me--I shall never mention
them again, and don't you, my dear!"--this a little hurriedly--"don't
you; all that is buried now, and I must make it up to you. Your
letters?" he continued, patting her hand. "Yes, Peter told me that you
wrote to me. I need not say that I never had them. No, never had
them--Toft, what is it?"

The change in his voice struck her. The servant had come in quietly.
"Mr. Basset, sir, has lost----"

"Another time!" John Audley replied curtly. "Another time! I am
engaged now. Go!" Then when the door had closed behind the servant,
"No, my dear," he continued, "I need not say that I never had them, so
that I first heard of your troubles through a channel upon which I
will not dwell. However, many good things come by bad ways, Mary. I
hope you like the Gatehouse?"

"It is charming!" she cried with enthusiasm.

"It has only one drawback," he said.

She was clever enough to understand that he referred to its owner, and
to escape from the subject. "This room," she said, "is perfection. I
have never seen anything like it, sir."

"It is a pleasant room," he said, looking round him. "There is our
coat over the mantel, gules, a fret or; like all old coats, very
simple. Some think it is the Lacy Knot; the Audley of Edward the
First's time married a Lacy. But we bore our old coat of three
Butterflies later than that, for before the fall of Roger Mortimer,
who was hung at Tyburn, he married his daughter to an Audley, and the
escheaters found the wedding chamber in his house furnished with our
Butterflies. Later the Butterfly survived as our badge. You see it
there!" he continued, pointing it out among the mouldings of the
ceiling. "There is the Stafford Knot, the badge of the great Dukes of
Buckingham, the noblest of English families; it is said that the last
of the line, a cobbler, died at Newport, not twenty miles from here.
We intermarried with them, and through them with Peter's people, the
Bassets. That is the Lovel Wolf, and there is the White Wolf of the
Mortimers--all badges. But you do not know, I suppose, what a badge
is?"

"I am afraid not," she said, smiling. "But I am as proud of our
Butterfly, and as proud to be an Audley, sir, as if I knew more."

"Peter must give you some lessons in heraldry," he answered. "We live
in the past here, my dear, and we must indoctrinate you with a love of
our pursuits or you will be dull." He paused to consider. "I am afraid
that we cannot allot you a drawing-room, but you must make your room
upstairs as comfortable as you can. Etruria will see to that. And
Peter shall arrange a table for you in the south bay here, and it
shall be your table and your bay. That is his table; this is mine. We
are orderly, and so we do not get in one another's way."

She thanked him gratefully, and with tears in her eyes, she said
something to which he would not listen--he only patted her hand--as to
his kindness, his great kindness, in receiving her. She could not,
indeed, put her relief into words, so deep was it. Nowhere, she felt,
could life be more peaceful or more calm than in this room which no
sounds of the outer world except the songs of birds, no sights save
the swaying of branches disturbed; where the blazoned panes cast their
azure and argent on lines of russet books, where an aged hound
sprawled before the embers, and the measured tick of the clock alone
vied with the scratching of the pen. She saw herself seated there
during drowsy summer days, or when firelight cheered the winter
evenings. She saw herself sewing beside the hearth while her
companions worked, each within his circle of light.

Then, she also was an Audley. She also had her share in the race which
had lived long on this spot. Already she was fired with the desire to
know more of them, and that flame John Audley was well fitted to fan.
For he was not of the school of dry-as-dust antiquaries. He had the
knack of choosing the picturesque in story, he could make it stand out
for others, he could impart life to the actors in it. And, anxious to
captivate Mary, he bent himself for nearly an hour to the display of
his knowledge. Taking for his text one or other of the objects about
him, he told her of great castles, from which England had been ruled,
and through which the choicest life of the country had passed, that
now were piles of sherds clothed with nettles. He told her of that
woodland country on the borders of three counties, where the papists
had long lived undisturbed and where the Gunpowder Plot had had its
centre. He told her of the fashion which came in with Richard the
Second, of adorning the clothes with initials, reading and writing
having become for the first time courtly accomplishments; and to
illustrate this he showed her the Westminster portrait of Richard in a
robe embroidered with letters of R. He quoted Chaucer:


              And thereon hung a broch of gold ful schene
              On which was first i-written a crowned A
              And after that, Amor vincit omnia.


Then, turning his back on her, he produced from some secret place a
key, and opening a masked cupboard in the wall, he held out for her
inspection a small bowl, bent and mis-shapen by use, and supported by
two fragile butterflies. The whole was of silver so thin that to
modern eyes it seemed trivial. Traces of gilding lingered about some
parts of it, and on each of the wings of the butterflies was a capital
A.

She was charmed. "Of all your illustrations," she cried, "I prefer
this one! It is very old, I suppose?"

"It is of the fifteenth century," he said, turning it about. "We
believe that it was made for the Audley who fell early in the Wars of
the Roses. Pages and knights, maids and matrons, gloves of silk and
gloves of mail, wrinkled palms and babies' fingers, the men, the
women, the children of twelve generations of our race, my dear, have
handled this. Once, according to an old inventory, there were six;
this one alone remains."

"It must be very rare?" she said, her eyes sparkling.

"It is very rare," he said, and he handled it as if he loved it. He
had not once allowed it to go out of his fingers. "Very rare. I doubt
if, apart from the City Companies, there is another in the hands of
the original owners."

"And it came to you by descent, sir?"

He paused in the act of returning it to its hiding-place. "Yes, that
is how it came to me," he said in a muffled tone. But he seemed to be
a long time putting it away; and when he turned with the key in his
hand his face was altered, and he looked at her--well, had she done
anything to anger him, she would have thought he was angry. "To whom
besides me could it descend!" he asked, his voice raised a tone. "But
there, I must not grow excited. I think--I think you had better go
now. Go, my dear, now. But come back presently."

Mary went. But the change in tone and face had been such as to startle
her and to dash the happy mood of a few moments earlier. She wondered
what she had said to annoy him.




                              CHAPTER IX

                              OLD THINGS


The Gatehouse, placed on the verge of the upland, was very solitary.
Cut off from the vale by an ascent which the coachmen of the great
deemed too rough for their horses, it was isolated on the other three
sides by Beaudelays Park and by the Great Chase, which flung its
barren moors over many miles of table-land. In the course of the
famous suit John Audley had added to the solitude of the house by a
smiling aloofness which gave no quarter to those who agreed with his
rival. The result was that when Mary came to live there, few young
people would have found the Gatehouse a lively abode.

But to Mary during the quiet weeks that followed her arrival it seemed
a paradise. She spent long hours in the open air, now seated on a
fallen trunk in some glade of the park, now watching the squirrels in
the clear gloom of the beech-wood, or again, lying at length on the
carpet of thyme and heather that clothed the moor. She came to know by
heart every path through the park--except that which led to the Great
House; she discovered where the foxgloves clustered, where the
meadow-sweet fringed the runlet, where the rare bog-bean warned the
traveller to look to his footing. Even the Great Chase she came to
know, and almost daily she walked to a point beyond the park whence
she could see the distant smoke of a mining village. That was the one
sign of life on the Chase; elsewhere it stretched vast and unpeopled,
sombre under a livid sky, smiling in sunshine, here purple with ling,
there scarred by fire--always wide under a wide heaven, raised high
above the common world. Now and again she met a shepherd or saw a gig,
lessened by distance, making its slow way along a moorland track. But
for days together she might wander there without seeing a human being.

The wide horizon became as dear to her as the greenwood. Pent as she
had been in cities, straitened in mean rooms where sight and smell had
alike been outraged, she revelled in this sweet and open life. The hum
of bees, the scent of pines, the flight of the ousel down the water,
the whistle of the curlew, all were to her pleasures as vivid as they
were new.

Meantime Basset made no attempt to share her excursions. He was
fighting a battle with himself, and he knew better than to go out of
his way to aid the enemy. And for her part she did not miss him. She
did not dislike him, but the interest he excited in her was feeble.
The thought of comparing him with Lord Audley, with the man to whose
intervention she owed this home, this peace, this content, never
occurred to her. Of Audley she did think as much perhaps as was
prudent, sometimes with pensive gratitude, more rarely with a smile
and a blush at her folly in dwelling on him. For always she thought of
him as one, high and remote, whom it was not probable that she would
ever see again, one whose course through life lay far from hers.

Presently, it is not to be denied, Basset began to grow upon her. He
was there. He was part of her life. Morning and evening she had to do
with him. Often she read or sewed in the same room with him, and in
many small ways he added to her comfort. Sometimes he suggested things
which would please her uncle; sometimes he warned her of things which
she would do well to avoid. Once or twice he diverted to himself a
spirt of John Audley's uncertain temper; and though Mary did not
always detect the man[oe]uvre, though she was far from suspecting the
extent of his vigilance or the care which he cast about her, it would
have been odd if she had not come to think more kindly of him, and to
see merits in him which had escaped her at first.

Meanwhile he thought of her with mingled feelings. At first with
doubt--it was never out of his mind that she had made much of Lord
Audley and little of him. Then with admiration which he withstood more
feebly as time went on, and the cloven hoof failed to appear. Later,
with tenderness, which, hating the scheme John Audley had formed, he
masked even from himself, and which he was sure that he would never
have the courage to express in her presence.

For Basset was conscious that, aspire as he might, he was not a hero.
The clash of life, the shock of battle, had no attraction for him. The
library at the Gatehouse was, he owned it frankly, his true sphere.
She, on the other hand, had had experiences. She had sailed through
unknown seas, she had led a life strange to him. She had seen much,
done much, suffered much, had held her own among strangers. Before her
calmness and self-possession he humbled himself. He veiled his head.

He did not attempt, therefore, to accompany her abroad, but at home he
had no choice save to see much of her. There was only one living room
for all, and she glided with surprising ease into the current of the
men's occupations. At first she was astray on the sea of books. Her
knowledge was not sufficient to supply chart or compass, and it fell
to Basset to point the way, to choose her reading, to set in a proper
light John Audley's vivid pictures of the past, to teach her the
elements of heraldry and genealogy. She proved, however, an apt
scholar, and very soon she dropped into the position of her uncle's
secretary. Sometimes she copied his notes, at other times he set her
on the track of a fact, a relationship, a quotation, and she would
spend hours in a corner, embedded in huge tomes of the county
histories. Dugdale, Leland, Hall, even Polydore Vergil, became her
friends. She pored over the Paston Letters, probed the false pedigrees
of Banks, and could soon work out for herself the famous discovery
respecting the last Lovel.

For a young girl it was an odd pursuit. But the past was in the
atmosphere of the house, it went with the fortunes of a race whose
importance lay in days long gone. Then all was new to her, enthusiasm
is easily caught, and Mary, eager to please her uncle, was glad to be
of use. She found the work restful after the suspense of the past
year. It sufficed for the present, and she asked no more.

She never forgot the lamplit evenings of that summer; the spacious
room, the fluttering of the moths that entered by the open windows,
the flop of the old dog as it sought a cooler spot, the whisper of
leaves turned ceaselessly in the pursuit of a fact or a fancy. In the
retrospect all became less a picture than a frame containing a past
world, a fifteenth-century world of color and movement, of rooms
stifled in hangings and tapestries, of lines of spear-points and rows
of knights in surcoats, of tolling bells and praying monks, of
travellers kneeling before wayside shrines, of strange changes of
fortune. For says the chronicler:


"I saw one of them, who was Duke of Exeter (but he concealed his name)
following the Duke of Burgundy's train barefoot and bare-legged,
begging his bread from door to door--this person was the next of the
House of Lancaster and had married King Edward's sister."


And of dark sayings:


"Thys sayde Edward, Duke of Somerset, had herde a fantastyk prophecy
that he sholde dy under a Castelle, wherefore he, as meche as in him
was, he lete the King that he sholde not come in the Castelle of
Wynsore, dredynge the sayde prophecy; but at Seint Albonys there was
an hostelry havyng the sygne of a Castelle, and before that hostelry
he was slayne."


"His badge was a Portcullis," her uncle said, when she read this to
him, "so it was natural that he should fall before a castle. He used
the Beanstalk, too, and if his name had been John, a pretty thing
might have been raised upon it. But you're divagating, my dear," he
continued, smiling--and seldom had Mary seen him in a better
humor--"you're divagating, whereas I--I believe that I have solved the
problem of the Feathers."

"The Prince of Wales's? No!"

"I believe so. Of course there is no truth in the story which traces
them to the blind King of Bohemia, killed at Crécy. His crest was two
vulture wings."

"But what of Arderne, who was the Prince's surgeon?" Basset objected.
"He says clearly that the Prince gained it from the King of Bohemia."

"Not at all!" John Audley replied arrogantly--at this moment he was an
antiquary and nothing more. "Where is the Arderne extract? Listen.
'Edward, son of Edward the King, used to wear such a feather, and
gained that feather from the King of Bohemia, whom he slew at Crécy,
and so assumed to himself that feather which is called an ostrich
feather which the first-named most illustrious King, used to wear on
his crest.' Now who was the first-named most illustrious King, who
before that used to wear it?"

"The King of Bohemia."

"Rubbish! Arderne means his own King, 'Edward the King.' He means that
the Black Prince, after winning his spurs by his victory over the
Bohemian, took his father's insignia. He had only been knighted six
weeks and waited to wear his father's crest until he had earned it."

"By Jove, sir!" Basset exclaimed, "I believe you are right!"

"Of course I am! The evidence is all that way. The Black Prince's
brothers wore it; surely not because their brother had done something,
but because it was their father's crest, probably derived from their
mother, Philippa of Hainault? If you will look in the inventory of
jewels made on the usurpation of Henry the Fourth you will see this
item, 'A collar of the livery of the Queen, on whom God have mercy,
with an ostrich.'"

"But that," Basset interposed, "was Queen Anne of Bohemia--she died
seven years before. There you get Bohemia again!"

"Compare this other entry," replied the antiquary, unmoved: "'A collar
of the livery of Queen Anne, of branches of rosemary.' Now either
Queen Anne of Bohemia had two liveries--which is unlikely--or the
inventory made by order of Henry IV. quotes verbatim from lists made
during the lifetime of Queen Anne; if this be the case, the last
deceased Queen, on whom God have mercy, would be Philippa of Hainault;
and we have here a clear statement that her livery was an ostrich, of
which ostrich her husband wore a feather on his crest."

Basset clapped his hands. Mary beat applause on the table. "Hurrah!"
she cried. "Audley for ever!"

"Miss Audley," Basset said, "Toft shall bring in hot water, and we
will have punch!"

"Miss Audley!" her uncle exclaimed, with a wrinkling nose. "Why don't
you call her Mary? And why, child, don't you call him Peter?"

Mary curtseyed. "Why not, my lord?" she said. "Peter it shall
be--Peter who keeps the keys that you discover!"

And Peter laughed. But he saw that she used his name without a blush
or a tremor, whereas he knew that if he could force his lips to frame
her name, the word would betray him. For by this time, from his seat
at his remote table, and from the ambush of his book, he had watched
her too often for his peace, and too closely not to know that she was
indifferent to him. He knew that at the best she felt a liking for
him, the growth of habit, and tinged, he feared, with contempt.

He was so far right that there were three persons in the house who had
a larger share of the girl's thoughts than he had. The first was John
Audley. He puzzled her. There were times when she could not doubt his
affection, times when he seemed all that she could desire, kind,
good-humored, frank, engaged with the simplicity of a child in
innocent pursuits, and without one thought beyond them. But touch
a certain spot, approach with steps ever so delicate a certain
subject--Lord Audley and his title--and his manner changed, the very
man changed, he became secretive, suspicious, menacing. Nor, however
quickly she might withdraw from the danger-line, could the harm be
undone at once. He would remain for hours gloomy and thoughtful, would
eye her covertly and with suspicion, would sit silent through meals,
and at times mutter to himself. More rarely he would turn on her with
a face which rage made inhuman, a face that she did not know, and with
a shaking hand he would bid her go--go, and leave the room!

The first time that this happened she feared that he might follow up
his words by sending her away. But nothing ensued, then or later. For
a while after each outburst he would appear ill at ease. He would
avoid her eyes, and look away from her in a manner almost as
unpleasant as his violence; later, in a shamefaced way, he would tell
her that she must not excite him, she must not excite him, it was bad
for him. And the man-servant meeting her in the hall, would take the
liberty of giving her the same advice.

Toft, indeed, was the second who puzzled her. He was civil, with the
civility of the trained servant, but always there was in his manner a
reserve. And she fancied that he watched her. If she left the house
and glanced back she was certain to see his face at a window, or his
figure in a doorway. Within doors it was the same. He slept out,
living with his wife in the kitchen wing, which had a separate
entrance from the courtyard. But he was everywhere at all hours. Even
his master appeared uneasy in his presence, and either broke off what
he was saying when the man entered, or continued the talk on another
note. More rarely he turned on Toft and without rhyme or reason would
ask him harshly what he wanted.

The third person to share Mary's thoughts, but after a more pleasant
fashion, was Toft's daughter, Etruria. "I hope you will like her, my
dear," John Audley had said. "She will give you such attendance as you
require, and will share the south wing with you at night. The two
bedrooms there are on a separate staircase. I sleep above the library
in this wing, and Peter in the tower room--we have our own staircase.
I have brought her into the house because I thought you might not like
to sleep alone in that wing."

Mary had thanked him, and had said how much she liked the girl. And
she had liked her, but for a time she had not understood her. Etruria
was all that was good and almost all that was beautiful. She was
simple, kindly, helpful, having the wide low brow, the placid eyes,
and perfect complexion of a Quaker girl--and to add to these
attractions she was finely shaped, though rather plump than slender;
and she was incredibly neat. Nor could any Quaker girl have been more
gentle or more demure.

But she might have had no tongue, she was so loth to use it; and a
hundred times Mary wondered what was behind that reticence. Sometimes
she thought that the girl was merely stupid. Sometimes she yoked her
with her father in the suspicions she entertained of him. More often,
moved by the girl's meek eyes, she felt only a vague irritation. She
was herself calm by nature, and reserved by training, the last to
gossip with a servant, even with one whose refinement appeared innate.
But Etruria's dumbness was beyond her.

One day in a research which she was making she fancied that she had
hit on a discovery. It happened that Etruria came into the room at the
moment, and in the fulness of her heart Mary told her of it.
"Etruria," she said, "I've made a discovery all by myself."

"Yes, Miss."

"Something that no one has known for hundreds of years! Think of
that!"

"Indeed, Miss."

Provoked, Mary took a new line. "Etruria," she asked, "are you happy?"

The girl did not answer.

"Don't you hear me? I asked if you were happy."

"I am content, Miss."

"I did not ask that. Are you happy?"

And then, moved on her side, perhaps, by an impulse towards
confidence, Etruria yielded. "I don't think that we can any of us be
happy, Miss," she said, "with so much sorrow about us."

"You strange girl!" Mary cried, taken aback. "What do you mean?"

But Etruria was silent.

"Come," Mary insisted. "You must tell me what you mean."

"Well, Miss," the girl answered reluctantly, "I'm sad and loth to
think of all the suffering in the world. It's natural that you should
not think of it, but I'm of the people, and I'm sad for them."

Balaam when the ass spoke was scarcely more surprised than Mary.
"Why?" she asked.

The girl pointed to the open window. "We've all we could ask,
Miss--light and air and birds' songs and sunshine. We've all we need,
and more. But I come of those who have neither light nor air, nor
songs nor sunshine, who've no milk for children nor food for mothers!
Who, if they've work, work every hour of the day in dust and noise and
heat. Who are half clemmed from year's end to year's end, and see no
close to it, no hope, no finish but the pauper's deals! It's for them
I'm sad, Miss."

"Etruria!"

"They've no teachers and no time to care," Etruria continued in
desperate earnest now that the floodgates were raised. "They're just
tools to make money, and, like the tools, they wear out and are cast
aside! For there are always more to do their work, to begin where they
began, and to be worn out as they were worn out!"

"Don't!" Mary cried.

Etruria was silent, but two large tears rolled down her face. And Mary
marvelled. So this mild, patient girl, going about her daily tasks,
could think, could feel, could speak, and upon a plane so high that
the listener was sensible of humiliation as well as surprise! For a
moment this was the only effect made upon her. Then reflection did its
part--and memory. She recalled that glimpse of the under-world which
she had had on her journey from London. She remembered the noisome
alleys, the cinder wastes, the men toiling half-naked at the furnaces,
the pinched faces of the women; and she remembered also the account
which Lord Audley had given her of the fierce contest between town and
country, plough and forge, land-lord and cotton-lord, which had struck
her so much at the time.

In the charms of her new life, in her new interests, these things had
faded from her mind. They recurred now, and she did not again ask
Etruria what she meant. "Is it as bad as that?" she asked.

"It is not as bad as it has been," Etruria answered. "Three years ago
there were hundreds of thousands out of work. There are thousands,
scores of thousands, still; and thousands have no food but what's
given them. And charity is bitter to many," she added, "and the
poorhouse is bitter to all."

"But what has caused things to be so bad?"

"Some say one thing and some another. But most that machines lower
wages, Miss, and the bread-tax raises food."

"Ah!" Mary said. And she looked more closely at the girl who knew so
much that was at odds with her station.

"Others," Etruria continued, a faint color in her cheeks, "think that
it is selfishness, that every one is for himself and no one for one
another, and----"

"Yes?" Mary said, seeing that she hesitated.

"And that if every one thought as much of his neighbor as of himself,
or even of his neighbor as well as of himself, it would not be
machines nor corn-taxes nor poorhouses would be strong enough to take
the bread out of the children's mouths or the work out of men's
hands!"

Mary had an inspiration. "Etruria," she cried, "some one has been
teaching you this."

The girl blushed. "Well, Miss," she said simply, "it was at church I
learned most of it."

"At church? What church? Not Riddsley?" For it was to Riddsley, to a
service as dull as it was long, that they proceeded on Sundays in a
chaise as slow as the reader.

"No, Miss, not Riddsley," Etruria answered. "It's at Brown Heath on
the Chase. But it's not a real church, Miss. It's a room."

"Oh!" Mary replied. "A meeting-house!"

For some reason Etruria's eyes gleamed. "No, Miss," she said. "It's
the curate at Riddsley has a service in a room at Brown Heath on
Thursdays."

"And you go?"

"When I can, Miss."

The idea of attending church on a week-day was strange to Mary; as
strange as to that generation was the zeal that passed beyond the
common channel to refresh those whom migrations of population or
changes in industry had left high and dry. The Tractarian movement was
giving vigor not only to those who supported it, but to those who
withstood it.

"And you've a sermon?" Mary said. "What was the text last Thursday,
Etruria?"

The girl hesitated, considered, then looked with appeal at her
mistress. She clasped her hands. "'Two are better than one,'" she
replied, "'because they have good reward for their labor. For if they
fall, one will lift up his fellow, but woe to him that is alone when
he falleth, for he hath not another to lift him up.'"

"Gracious, Etruria!" Mary cried. "Is that in the Bible?"

Etruria nodded.

"And what did your preacher say about it?"

"That the employer and the workman were fellows, and if they worked
together and each thought for the other they would have a good reward
for their labor; that if one fell, it was the duty of the other to
help him up. And again, that the land and the mill were fellows--the
town and the country--and if they worked together in love they would
have a good return, and if trouble came to one the other should
bear with him. But all the same," Etruria added timidly, "that the
bread-taxes were wrong."

"Etruria," Mary said. "To-morrow is Thursday. I shall go with you to
Brown Heath."





                              CHAPTER X

                              NEW THINGS


Mary Audley, crossing the moor to a week-day service, was but one of
many who in the 'forties were venturing on new courses. In religion
there were those who fancied that by a return to primitive forms they
might recapture the primitive fervor; and those again who, like the
curate whom Mary was going to hear, were bent on pursuing the beaten
path into new places. Some thought that they had found a panacea for
the evils of the day in education, and put their faith in workmen's
institutes and night schools. Others were satisfied with philanthropy,
and proclaimed that infants of seven ought not to toil for their
living, that coal-pits were not fit places for women, and that what
paid was not the only standard of life. A few dreamt of a new England
in which gentle and simple were to mix on new-old terms; and a
multitude, shrewd and hard-headed, believed in the Corn Law League,
whose speakers travelled from Manchester to carry the claims of cheap
bread to butter crosses and market towns, and there bearded the very
landlord's agent.

The truth was that the country was lying sick with new evils, and had
perforce to find a cure, whether that cure lay in faith, or in the
primer, or in the Golden Rule, or in Adam Smith. For two generations
men had been quitting the field for the mill, the farm for the
coal-pit. They had followed their work into towns built haphazard,
that grew presently into cities. There, short of light, of air, of
water, lacking decency, lacking even votes--for the Reform Bill,
that was to give everything to everybody, had stopped at the
masters--lacking everything but wages, they swarmed in numbers
stupendous and alarming to the mind of that day. And then the wages
failed. Machines pushed out hands, though


              Tools were made, and born were hands,
              Every farmer understands.


Machines lowered wages, machines glutted the markets. Men could get no
work, masters could sell no goods. On the top of this came bad seasons
and dear bread. Presently hundreds of thousands were living on public
charity, long lists of masters were in the _Gazette_. In the gloomy
cities of the North, masses of men heaved and moaned as the sea when
the south-west wind falls upon it.

All but the most thoughtless saw danger as well as unhappiness in
this, and called on their gods. The Chartists proclaimed that safety
lay in votes. The landed interest thought that a little more
protection might mend matters. The Golden Rulers were for shorter
hours. But the men who were the loudest and the most confident cried
that cheap bread would mend all. The poor, they said, would have to
eat and to spend. They would buy goods, the glut would cease. The
wheels would turn again, there would be work and wages. The Golden Age
would return. So preached the Manchester men.

In the meantime the doctors wrangled, and the patient grew a little,
not much, better. And Mary Audley and Etruria walked across the
moorland in the evening sunshine, with a light breeze stirring the
bracken, and waves of shadow moving athwart the stretches of purple
ling. They seemed very far, very remote from the struggle for life and
work and bread that was passing in the world below.

Presently they dropped into a fern-clad dingle and saw below them,
beside the rivulet that made music in its bottom, a house or two.
Descending farther, they came on more houses, crawling up the hill
slopes, and on a few potato patches and ash-heaps. As the sides of the
valley rose higher and closed in above the walkers cottages fell into
lines on either side of the brook, and began to show one behind the
other in rough terraces, with middens that slid from the upper to the
lower level. The valley bent to the left, and quickly tall chimneys
became visible, springing from a huddle of mean roofs through which no
other building of size, no tower, no steeple, rose to break the ugly
sameness. This was Brown Heath.

"It's a rough place," Etruria said as they picked their way. "But
don't be afraid, Miss. I'm often passing, and they know me."

Still it was a rough place. The roadway was a cinder-track, and from
the alleys and lanes above it open drains wormed their way across the
path and into the stream, long grown foul. The air was laden with
smoke, coal dust lay everywhere; the most cleanly must have despaired.
Men seated, pipe in mouth, on low walls, watched the two go by--not
without some rude banter; frowsy women crouching on door-steps and
nursing starveling babes raised sullen faces. Lads in clogs made way
for them unwillingly. In one place a crowd seethed from a side street
and, shouting and struggling, overflowed the roadway before them and
threatened to bar their path.

"It's a dog-fight," Etruria said. "They are rare and fond of them,
Miss. We'd best get by quickly."

They passed in safety, passed, too, a brawl between two colliers, the
air about them thick with oaths, passed a third eddy round two women
fighting before a public-house. "The chaps are none so gentle,"
Etruria said, falling unconsciously into a commoner way of speaking.
"They're all for fighting, dogs or men, and after dark I'm not saying
we'd be safe. But we'll be over the moor by dusk, Miss."

They came, as she spoke, to a triangular space, sloping with the hill,
skirted by houses, and crossed by an open sewer. It was dreary and
cinder-covered, but five publics looked upon it and marked it for the
centre of Brown Heath. Etruria crossed the triangle to a building a
little cleaner than its neighbors; it was the warehouse, she told her
mistress, of a sack-maker who had failed. She entered, and her
companion followed her.

Mary found herself in a bare barn-like room, having two windows set
high in the walls, the light from which fell coldly on a dozen benches
ranged one behind the other, but covering only a portion of the floor.
On these were seated, when they entered, about twenty persons, mainly
women, but including three or four men of the miner class. No attempt
had been made to alter the character of the place, and of formality
there was as little. The two had barely seated themselves before a
lean young man, with a long pale face and large nose, rose from the
front bench, and standing before the little congregation, opened his
book. He wore shabby black, but neither surplice nor gown.

The service lasted perhaps twenty minutes, and Mary was not much
moved by it. The young man's voice was weak, the man himself looked
under-fed. She noticed, however, that as the service went on the
number in the room grew, and when it closed she found that all the
seats were filled, and that there were even a few men--some of them
colliers fresh from the pit--standing at the back. Remembering the odd
text that the clergyman had given out the week before, she wondered
what he would choose to-day, and, faintly amused, she stole a glance
at her companion. But Etruria's rapt face was a reproach to her
levity.

The young clergyman pushed back the hair from his forehead. His
posture was ungainly, he did not know what to do with his hands, he
opened his mouth and shut it again. Then with an effort he began. "My
text, my friends," he said, "is but one word, 'Love.' Where will you
find it in the Scriptures? In every chapter and in every verse. In the
dark days of old the order was 'Thou shalt live!' The new order in
these days is 'Thou shalt love!'" He began by describing the battle of
