
But the other did not take the hand held out to him. He was staring at
the candle. "I am not clear that I have been quite frank with you," he
said awkwardly. "You have offered me the shelter of your house though
I am a stranger, Mr. Basset, and though you must suspect that to
harbor me may expose you to remark. Well, I may be tempted to avail
myself of your kindness. But I cannot do so unless you know more of my
circumstances."

"I know all that is necessary."

"You don't know what I am going to tell you," Colet persisted. "And I
think that you should. I am going to marry the daughter of your
uncle's servant, Toft."

"Good Lord!" cried Basset. This was a second and more serious blow. It
brought him down from the clouds.

"That shocks you, Mr. Basset," the curate continued with dignity,
"that I should marry one in her position? Well, I am not called upon
to justify it. Why I think her worthy, and more than worthy to share
my life, is my business. I only trouble you with the matter because
you have made me an offer which you might not have made had you known
this."

Basset did not deny the fact. He could not, indeed. His taste, his
prejudice, his traditions all had received a blow, all were up in
arms; and, for the moment, at any rate he repented of his visit. He
felt that in stepping out of the normal round he had made a mistake.
He should have foreseen, he should have known that he would meet with
such shocks. "You have certainly astonished me," he said after a pause
of dismay. "I cannot think the match suitable, Mr. Colet. May I ask if
my uncle knows of this?"

"Miss Audley knows of it."

"But--you cannot yourself think it suitable!"

"I have," Colet replied dryly, "or rather I had seventy pounds a year.
What girl, born in comfort, gently bred, sheltered from childhood
could I ask to share that? How could I, with so little in the present
and no prospects, ask a gentlewoman to share my lot?"

Basset did not reply, but he was not convinced. A clergyman to marry a
servant, good and refined as Etruria was! It seemed to him to be
unseemly, to be altogether wrong.

Colet too was silent a moment. Then, "I am glad I have told you this,"
he said. "I shall not now trespass on you. On the other hand, I hope
that you may still do something--and with your name, you can do
much--for the good cause. If rumor goes for anything, many will in the
next few months examine the ground on which they stand. It will be
much, if what I have said has weight with you."

He spoke with constraint, but he spoke like a man, and Basset owned
his equality while he resented it. He felt that he ought to renew his
offer of hospitality, but he could not--reserve and shyness had him
again in their grip. He muttered something about thinking it over,
added a word or two of thanks--which were cut short by the flickering
out of the candle--and a minute later he was in the dark deserted
street, and walking back to his inn--not over well content with
himself, if the truth be told.

Either he should not have gone, he felt, or he should have gone the
whole way, sunk his ideas of caste, and carried the thing through.
What was it to him if the man was going to marry a servant?

But that was a detail. The main point was that he should not have
gone. It had been a foolish impulse--he saw it now--which had taken
him to the barber's shop; and one which he might have known that he
would repent. He ought to have foreseen that he could not place
himself on Colet's level without coming into collision with him; that
he could not draw wisdom from him without paying toll.

An impossible person, he thought, a man of ideas quite unlike his own!
And yet the man had spoken well and ably, and spoken from experience.
He had told the things that he had seen as he passed from house to
house, hard, sad facts, the outcome of rising numbers and falling
wages, of over-production, of mouths foodless and unwanted. And all
made worse, as he maintained, by this tax on bread, that barely
touched the rich man's income, yet took a heavy toll from the small
wage.

As he recalled some of the things that he had heard, Basset felt his
interest revive. Colet had dealt with facts; he had attempted no
oratory, he had cast no glamour over them. But he had brought to bear
upon them the light of an ideal--the Christian ideal of unselfishness;
and his hearer, while he doubted, while he did not admit that the
solution was practical, owned its beauty.

For he too, as we know, had had his aspirations, though he had rarely
thought of turning them into action. Instead, he had hidden them
behind the commonplace; and in this he had matched the times, which
were commonplace. For the country lay in the trough of the wave.
Neither the fine fury of the generation which had adored the rights of
man, nor the splendid endurance which the great war had fostered, nor
the lesser ardors of the Reform era, which found its single panacea in
votes, touched or ennobled it. Great wealth and great poverty,
jostling one another, marked a material age, seeking remedies in
material things, despising arms, decrying enthusiasm; an age which
felt, but hardly bowed as yet, to the breath of the new spirit.

But Basset--perhaps because the present offered no great prospect to
the straitened squire--had had his glimpses of a life higher and
finer, devoted to something above the passing whim and the day's
indulgence, a life that should not be useless to those who came after
him. Was it possible that he now heard the call? Could this be the
crusade of which he had idly dreamed? Had the trumpet sounded at the
moment of his utmost need?

If only it were so! During the evening he had kept his sorrow at bay
as well as he could, distracting his thoughts with passing objects.
Now, as the boots ushered him up the close-smelling stairs to the
inn's best room, and he stood in his hat and coat, looking on the cold
bare aspect and the unfamiliar things--he owned himself desolate. The
thought of Mary, of his hopes and plans and of the end of these,
returned upon him in an irresistible flood. The waters which he had
stemmed all day, though all day they had lapped his lips, overwhelmed
him with their bitterness. Mary! He had loved her and she--he knew
what she thought of him.

He could not take up the old life. She had made an end of that, the
rather as from this time onward the Gatehouse would be closed to him
by her presence. And the old house near Wootton where he had been wont
to pass part of his time? That hardly met his needs or his
aspirations. Unhappy as he was, he could not see himself sitting down
in idleness, to brood and to rust in a home so remote, so quiet, so
lost among the stony hills that the country said of it,


                    "Wootton under Weaver
                     Where God came never!"


No, he could hardly face that. Hitherto he had not been called upon to
say what he would do with his life. Now the question was put to him
and he had to answer it. He had to answer it. For many minutes he sat
on the bed staring before him. And from time to time he sighed.




                             CHAPTER XVI

                    THE GREAT HOUSE AT BEAUDELAYS


It was about a week after this that two men stood on the neglected
lawn, contemplating the long blind front of Beaudelays House. With all
its grandeur the house lacked the dignity of ruin, for ruin presumes a
past, and the larger part of the Great House had no past. The ancient
wing that had welcomed brides, and echoed the laughter of children and
given back the sullen notes of the passing-bell did not suffice to
redeem the whole. By night the house might pass; the silent bulk
imposed on the eye. By day it required no effort of fancy to see the
scaffold still clinging to the brickwork, or to discern that the grand
entrance had never opened to guest or neighbor, that everyday life had
never gazed through the blank windows of the long fa√ßade.

The house, indeed, was not only dead. It had never lived.

Certainly Nature had done something to shroud the dead. The lawn was
knee-deep in weeds, and the evergreens about it had pushed out
embracing arms to narrow the vista before the windows. At the lower
end of the lawn a paved terrace, the width of the house, promised a
freer air, but even here grass sprouted between the flags, and elders
labored to uproot the stately balustrade that looked on the lower
garden. This garden, once formal, was now a tangle of vegetation, a
wilderness amid whose broad walks Venuses slowly turned to Dryads, and
classic urns lay in fragments, split by the frosts of some excessive
winter. Only the prospect of the Trent Valley and the Derbyshire
foot-hills, visible beyond the pleasance, still pleased; and this view
was vague and sad and distant. For the Great House, as became its
greatness, shunned the public eye, and, lying far back, set a wide
stretch of park between its bounds and the verge of the upland.

One of the two men was the owner. The other who bore a bunch of keys
was Stubbs. Both had a depressed air. It would have been hard to say
which of the two entered more deeply into the sadness of the place.

Presently my lord turned his back on the house. "The view is fine," he
said. "The only fine thing about the place," he added bitterly. "Isn't
there a sort of Belvedere below the garden?"

"There is, my lord. But I fear that it is out of repair."

"Like everything else! There, don't think I'm blaming you for it, man.
You cannot make bricks without straw. But let us look at this
Belvedere."

They descended the steps, and passed slowly along the grass-grown
walk, now and again stepping aside to avoid the clutch of a straggling
rose bough, or the fragments of a broken pillar. They paused to
inspect the sundial, a giant Butterfly with closed wings, a replica of
the stone monster in the Yew Walk. Lord Audley read the inscription,
barely visible through the verdigris that stained the dial-plate:


                        "Non sine sole volo!"


"Just so!" he said. "A short life and a merry one!"

A few paces farther along the walk they stopped to examine the basin
of the great fountain. Cracked from edge to centre, and become a
shallow bed of clay and weeds, it was now as unsightly as it had been
beautiful in the days when fair women leaning over it had fed the gold
fish, or viewed their mirrored faces in its waters.

"The fortunes of the Audleys in a nutshell!" muttered the unlucky
owner. And turning on his heel, "Confound it, Stubbs," he cried, "I
have had as much of this as I can stand! A little more and I shall go
back and cut my throat! It is beginning to rain, too. D--n the
Belvedere! Let us go into the house. That cannot be as bad as this."

Without waiting for an answer, or looking behind him, he strode back
the way they had come. Stubbs followed in silence, and they regained
the lawn.

"I tell you what it is," Audley continued, letting the agent come
abreast of him. "You must find some vulgarian to take the place--iron
man or cotton man, I don't care who he is, if he has got the cash I
You must let it, Stubbs. You must let it! It's a white elephant, it's
the d--ndest White Elephant man ever had!"

The lawyer shook his head. "You may be sure, my lord," he said mildly,
"I should have advised that long ago, if it were possible. But we
couldn't let it in its present state--for a short term; and we have no
more power to lease it for a long one than, as your lordship knows, we
have power to sell it."

The other swore. At the outset he had scarcely felt his poverty. But
he was beginning to feel it. There were moments such as this when his
withers were wrung; when the consequence which the title had brought
failed to soften the hardships of his lot--a poor peer with a vast
house. Had he tried to keep the Great House in repair it would have
swallowed the whole income of the peerage--a sum which, as it was,
barely sufficed for his needs as a bachelor.

Already Stubbs had hinted that there was one way out--a rich marriage.
And Audley had received the hint with the easiness of a man who was in
no haste to marry and might, likely enough, marry where money was. But
once or twice during the last few days, which they had been spending
in a review of the property, my lord had shown irritation. When an old
farmer had said to his face, that he must bring home a bride with a
good fat chest, "and his lordship would be what his forbears had
been," the great man, in place of a laughing answer, had turned glumly
away.

Presently the two halted at the door of the north wing. Stubbs
unlocked it and pushed it open. They entered an ante-room of moderate
size.

"Faugh!" Audley cried. "Open a window! Break one if necessary."

Stubbs succeeded in opening one, and they passed on into the great
hall, a room sixty feet long and open to the roof, a gallery running
round it. A withdrawing-room of half the length opened at one end, and
midway along the inner side a short passage led to a second hall--the
servants' hall--the twin of this. Together they formed an H, and were
probably a Jacobean copy of a Henry the Eighth building. A long table,
some benches, and a score of massive chairs furnished the room.
Between the windows hung a few ragged pictures, and on either side of
the farther door a piece of tapestry hung askew.

Audley looked about him. In this room eighty years before the old lord
had held his revels. The two hearths had glowed with logs, a hundred
wax-lights had shone on silver and glass and the rosy tints of old
wine. Guests in satin and velvet, henchmen and led captains, had
filled it with laughter and jest, and song. With a foot on the table
they had toasted the young king--not stout Farmer George, not the old,
mad monarch, but the gay young sovereign. To-day desolation reigned.
The windows gray with dirt let in a grisly light. All was bare and
cold and rusty--the webs of spiders crossed the very hearths. The old
lord, mouldering in his coffin, was not more unlike that Georgian
reveller than was the room of to-day unlike the room of eighty years
before.

Perhaps the thought struck his descendant. "God! What a
charnel-house!" he cried. "To think that men made merry in this room.
It's a vault, it's a grave! Let us get away from it. What's through,
man?"

They passed into the withdrawing-room, where panels of needlework of
Queen Anne's time, gloomy with age, filled the wall spaces, and a few
pieces of furniture crouched under shrouds of dust. As they stood
gazing two rats leapt from a screen of Cordovan leather that lay in
tatters on the floor. The rats paused an instant to stare at the
intruders, then fled in panic.

The younger man advanced to one of the panels in the wall. "A hunting
scene?" he said. "These may be worth money some day."

The lawyer looked doubtful. "It will be a long day first, I am
afraid," he said. "It's funereal stuff at the best, my lord."

"At any rate it is out of reach of the rats," Lord Audley answered. He
cast a look of distaste at the shreds of the screen. He touched them
with his foot. A third rat sprang out and fled squeaking to covert.
"Oh, d--n!" he said. "Let us see something else."

The lawyer led the way upstairs to the ghostly, echoing gallery that
ran round the hall. They glanced into the principal guest-room, which
was over the drawing-room. Then they went by the short passage of the
H to the range of bedrooms over the servants' hall. For the most part
they opened one from the other.

"The parents slept in the outer and the young ladies in the inner,"
Audley said, smiling. "Gad! it tells a tale of the times!"

Stubbs opened the nearest door and recoiled. "Take care, my lord!" he
said. "Here are the bats!"

"Faugh! What a smell! Can't you keep them out?"

"We tried years ago--I hate them like poison--but it was of no use.
They are in all these upper rooms."

They were. For when Stubbs, humping his shoulders as under a shower,
opened a second door, the bats streamed forth in a long silent
procession, only to stream back again as silently. In a dusky corner
of the second room a cluster, like a huge bunch of grapes, hung to one
of the rafters. Now and again a bat detached itself and joined the
living current that swept without a sound through the shadowy rooms.

"There's nothing beyond these rooms?"

"No."

"Then let us go down. Rats and bats and rottenness! _Non sine sole
volo!_ We may not, but the bats do. Let us go down! Or no! I was
forgetting. Where is the Muniment Room?"

"This way, my lord," Stubbs replied, turning with suspicious
readiness--the bats were his pet aversion. "I brought a candle and
some of the new lucifers. This way, my lord."

He led the way down to a door set in a corner of the ante-room. He
unlocked this and they found themselves at the foot of a circular
staircase. On the farther side of the stairfoot was another door which
led, Stubbs explained, into the servants' quarters. "This turret," he
added, "is older even than the wing, and forms no part of the H. It
was retained because it supplied a second staircase, and also a short
cut from the servants' hall to the entrance. The Muniment Room is over
this lobby on the first floor. Allow me to go first, my lord."

The air was close, but not unpleasant, and the stairs were clean. On
the first floor a low-browed door, clamped and studded with iron,
showed itself. Stubbs halted before it. There was a sputter. A light
shone out. "Wonderful invention!" he said. "Electric telegraph not
more wonderful, though marvellous invention that, my lord."

"Yes," the other answered dryly. "But--when were you here last,
Stubbs?"

"Not for a twelvemonth, my lord."

"Leave your candle?"

"No."

"Then what's that?" The young man pointed to something that lay in the
angle between a stair and the wall.

"God bless my soul!" the lawyer cried. "It's a candle."

"And clean. It has not been there a week. Who has been here, my
friend?"

Stubbs reflected. "No one with my authority," he said. "But if the
devil himself has been here," he continued, stoutly recovering
himself, "he can have done no harm. I can prove that in five minutes,
my lord--if you will kindly hold the light." He inserted a large key
in the lock, and with an effort, he shot back the bolts. He pushed
open the door and signed to Lord Audley to enter.

He did so, and Stubbs followed. They stood and looked about them. They
were in a whitewashed chamber twelve feet square, clean, bare, empty.
The walls gave back the light so that the one candle lit the place
perfectly.

"It's as good as air-tight," Stubbs said with pride. "And you see, my
lord, we swept it as bare as the palm of my hand. I can answer for it
that not a shred of paper or a piece of wax was left."

Audley, gazing about him, seemed satisfied. His face relaxed. "Yes,"
he said, "you could not overlook anything in a place like this. I'm
glad I've seen it."

He was turning to go when a thought struck him. He lowered the light
and scanned the floor. "All the same, somebody has been here!" he
exclaimed. "There's one of the things you are so pleased with--a
lucifer!"

Stubbs stooped and looked. "A lucifer?" he repeated. He picked up the
bit of charred wood and examined it. "Now how did that come here? I
never used one till six months ago."

My lord frowned. "Who is it?" he asked.

"Some one, I fear, who has had a key made," the agent answered,
shaking his head,

"I can see that for myself. But has he learned anything?"

Stubbs stared. "There's nothing to learn, my lord," he said. "You can
see that. Whoever he is, he has cracked the nut and found no kernel!"

The young man looked round him again. He nodded. "I suppose so," he
said. But he seemed ill at ease and inclined to find fault. He threw
the light of the candle this way and that, as if he expected the clean
white walls to tell a tale. "What's that?" he asked suddenly. "A
crack? Or what?"

Stubbs looked, passed his hand over the mark on the wall, effaced it.
"No, my lord, a cobweb," he said. "Nothing."

There was no more to be seen, yet Audley seemed loth to go. At length
he turned and went out. Stubbs closed and locked the door behind them,
then he took the candle from his lordship and invited him to go down
before him. Still the young man hesitated. "I suppose we can learn
nothing more?" he said.

"Nothing, my lord," Stubbs answered. "To tell you the truth, I have
long thought Mr. John mad, and it is possible that his madness has
taken this turn. But I am equally sure that there is nothing for him
to discover, if he spends every day of his life here."

"All the same I don't like it," the owner objected. "Whoever has been
here has no right here. It is odd that I had some notion of this
before we came. You may depend upon it that this was why he fixed
himself at the Gatehouse."

"He may have had something of the sort in his mind," Stubbs admitted.
"But I don't think so, my lord. More probably, being here and idle, he
took to wandering in for lack of something to do."

"And by and by, had a key made and strayed into the Muniment Room! No,
that won't do, Stubbs. And frankly there should be closer supervision
here. It should not have remained for me to discover this."

He began to descend, leaving Stubbs to digest the remark; who for his
part thought honestly that too much was being made of the matter.
Probably the intruder was John Audley; the man had a bee in his
bonnet, and what more likely than that he should be taken with a craze
to haunt the house which he believed was his own? But the agent was
too prudent to defend himself while the young man's vexation was
fresh. He followed him down in silence, and before many minutes had
passed, they were in the open air, and had locked the door behind
them.

Clouds hung low on the tops of the trees, mist veiled the view, and a
small rain was falling on the wet lawn. Nevertheless the young man
moved into the open. "Come this way," he said.

The lawyer turned up the collar of his coat and followed him
unwillingly. "Where does he get in?" my lord asked. It seemed as if
the longer he dwelt on the matter the less he liked it. "Not by that
door--the lock is rusty. The key had shrieked in it. Probably he
enters by one of the windows in the new part."

He walked towards the middle of the lawn and Stubbs, thankful that he
wore Wellington boots, followed him.

The lawyer thought that he had never seen the house wear so dreary an
aspect as it wore under the gray weeping sky. But his lordship was
more practical. "These windows look the most likely," he said after a
short survey: and he dragged his unwilling attendant to the point he
had marked.

A nearer view strengthened his suspicions. On the sill of one of the
windows were scratches and stains. "You see?" he said. "It should not
have been left to me to discover this! Probably John Audley comes from
the Gatehouse by the Yew Walk." He turned to measure the distance with
his eye, the distance which divided the spot from the Iron Gate.
"That's it," he said, "he comes----"

Then, "Good G--d!" he muttered. "Look! Look!" Stubbs looked. They both
looked. Beyond the lawn, on the farther side of the iron grille and
clinging to it with both hands, a man stood bareheaded under the rain.
Whether he had come uncovered, or his hat had been jerked from him by
some movement caused by their appearance, they could not tell; nor how
long he had stood thus, gazing at them through the bars. But they
could see that his eyes never wavered, that his hands gripped the
iron, and the two knew by instinct that in the intensity of his hate,
the man was insensible alike to the rain that drenched him, and to the
wind that blew out the skirts of his thin black coat.

Even Stubbs held his breath. Even he felt that there was something
uncanny and ominous in the appearance. For the gazer was John Audley.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                            TO THE RESCUE


Stubbs was the first to collect himself, but a minute elapsed before
he spoke. Then, "He must be mad," he cried, "mad, to expose himself to
the weather at his age. If I had not seen it, I couldn't believe it!"

"I suppose it is John Audley?"

"Yes." Then raising his voice, "My lord! I don't think I would go to
him now!"

But Audley was already striding across the lawn towards the gate. The
lawyer hesitated, gave way, and followed him.

They were within twenty paces of the silent watcher when he moved--up
to that time he might have been a lay figure. He shook one hand in the
air, as if he would beat them off, then he turned and walked stiffly
away. Half a dozen steps took him out of sight. The Yew Walk swallowed
him.

But, quickly as he vanished, the lawyer had had time to see that he
staggered. "I fear, my lord, he is ill," he said. "He will never reach
the Gatehouse in that state. I had better follow him."

"Why the devil did he come here?" Audley retorted savagely. The
watcher's strange aspect, his face, white against the dark yews, his
stillness, his gesture, a something ominous in all, had shaken him.
"If he had stopped at home----"

"Still----"

"D--n him, it's his affair!"

"Still we cannot leave him if he has fallen, my lord," Stubbs replied
with decision. And without waiting for his employer's assent he tried
the gate. It was locked, but in a trice he found the key on his bunch,
turned it, and pushed back the gate. Audley noticed that it moved
silently on its hinges.

Stubbs, the gate open, began to feel ashamed of his impulse. Probably
there was nothing amiss after all. But he had hardly looked along the
path before he uttered a cry, and hurrying forward, stooped over a
bundle of clothes that lay in the middle of the walk. It was John
Audley. Apparently he had tripped over a root and lain where he had
fallen.

Stubbs's cry summoned the other, who followed him through the gate, to
find him on his knees supporting the old man's head. The sight
recalled Audley to his better self. The mottled face, the staring
eyes, the helpless limbs shocked him. "Good G--d!" he cried, "you were
right, Stubbs! He might have died if we had left him."

"He would have died," Stubbs answered. "As it is--I am not sure." He
opened the waistcoat, felt for the beating of the heart, bent his ear
to it. "No, I don't think he's gone," he said, "but the heart is
feeble, very feeble. We must have brandy! My lord, you are the more
active. Will you go to the Gatehouse--there is no nearer place--and
get some? And something to carry him home! A hurdle if there is
nothing better, and a couple of men?"

"Right!" Audley cried.

"And don't lose a minute, my lord! He's nearly gone."

Audley stripped off his overcoat. "Wrap this about him!" he said. And
before the other could answer he had started for the Gatehouse, at a
pace which he believed that he could keep up.

Pad, pad, my lord ran under the yew trees, swish, swish across the
soaking grass, about the great Butterfly. Pad, pad, again through the
gloom under the yews! Not too fast, he told himself--he was a big man
and he must save himself. Now he saw before him the opening into the
park, and the light falling on the pale turf. And then, at a point not
more than twenty yards short of the open ground, he tripped over a
root, tried to recover himself, struck another root, and fell.

The fall shook him, but he was young, and he was quickly on his feet.
He paused an instant to brush the dirt from his hands and knees; and
it was during that instant that his inbred fear of John Audley, and
the certainty that if John Audley died he need fear no more, rose
before him.

Yes, if he died--this man who was even now plotting against him--there
was an end of that fear! There was an end of uneasiness, of anxiety,
of the alarm that assailed him in the small hours, of the forebodings
that showed him stripped of title and income and consequence. Stripped
of all!

Five seconds passed, and he still stood, engaged with his hands. Five
more; it was his knees he was brushing now--and very carefully.
Another five--the sweat broke out on his brow though the day was cold.
Twenty seconds, twenty-five! His face showed white in the gloom. And
still he stood. He glanced behind him. No one could see him.

But the movement discovered the man to himself, and with an oath he
broke away. He thrust the damning thought from him, he sprang forward.
He ran. In ten strides he was in the open park, and trotting steadily,
his elbows to his sides, across the sward. The blessed light was about
him, the wind swept past his ears, the cleansing rain whipped his
face. Thank God, he had left behind him the heavy air and noisome
scent of the yews. He hated them. He would cut them all down some day.

For in a strange way he associated them with the temptation which had
assailed him. And he was thankful, most thankful, that he had put that
temptation from him--had put it from him, when most men, he thought,
would have succumbed to it. Thank God, he had not! The farther he
went, indeed, the better he felt. By the time he saw the Gatehouse
before him, he was sure that few men, exposed to that temptation,
would have overcome it. For if John Audley died what a relief it would
be! And he had looked very ill; he had looked like a man at the point
of death. The brandy could not reach him under--well, under half an
hour. Half an hour was a long time, when a man looked like that. "I'll
do my best," he thought. "Then if he dies, well and good. I've always
been afraid of him."

He did not spare himself, but he was not in training, and he was well
winded when he reached the Gatehouse. A last effort carried him
between the Butterflies, and he halted on the flags of the courtyard.
A woman, whose skirts were visible, but whose head and shoulders were
hidden by an umbrella, was standing in the doorway on his left,
speaking to some one in the house. She heard his footsteps and turned.

"Lord Audley!" she exclaimed--for it was Mary Audley. Then with a
woman's quickness, "You have come from my uncle?" she cried. "Is he
ill?"

Audley nodded. "I am come for some brandy," he gasped.

She did not waste a moment. She sped into the house, and to the
dining-room. "I had missed him," she cried over her shoulder. "The
man-servant is away. I hoped he might be with him."

In a trice she had opened a cellarette and taken from it a decanter of
brandy. Then she saw that he could not carry this at any speed, and
she turned to the sideboard and took a wicker flask from a drawer.
With a steady hand and without the loss of a minute--he found her
presence of mind admirable--she filled this.

As she corked it, Mrs. Toft appeared, wiping her hands on her apron.
"Dear, dear, miss," she said, "is the master bad? But it's no wonder
when he, that doesn't quit the fire for a week together, goes out like
this? And Toft away and all!" She stared at his lordship. Probably she
knew him by sight.

"Will you get his bed warmed, Mrs. Toft," Mary answered. She gave Lord
Audley the flask. "Please don't lose a moment," she urged. "I am
following--oh yes, I am. But you will go faster."

She had not a thought, he saw, for the disorder of her dress, or for
her hair dishevelled by the wind, and scarce a thought for him. He
decided that he had never seen her to such advantage, but it was no
time for compliments, nor was she in the mood for them. Without more
he nodded and set off on his return journey--he had not been in the
house three minutes. By and by he looked back, and saw that Mary was
following on his heels. She had snatched up a sun-bonnet, discarded
the umbrella, and, heedless of the rain, was coming after him as
swiftly and lightly as Atalanta of the golden apple. "Gad, she's not
one of the fainting sort!" he reflected; and also that if he had given
way to that d--d temptation he could not have looked her in the face.
"As it is," his mind ran, "what are the odds the old boy's not dead
when we get there? If he is--I am safe! If he is not, I might do worse
than think of her. It would checkmate him finely. More"--he looked
again over his shoulder--"she's a fine mover, by Gad, and her figure's
perfect! Even that rag on her head don't spoil her!" Whereupon he
thought of a certain Lady Adela with whom he was very friendly, who
had political connections and would some day have a plum. The
comparison was not, in the matter of fineness and figure, to Lady
Adela's advantage. Her lines were rather on the Flemish side.

Meanwhile Mary was feeling anything but an Atalanta. Wind and rain and
wet grass, loosened hair and swaying skirts do not make for romance.
But in her anxiety she gave small thought to these. Her one instinct
was to help. With all his oddity her uncle had been kind to her, and
she longed to show him that she was grateful. And he was her one
relative. She had no one else in the world. He had given her what of
home he had, and ease, and a security which she had never known
before. Were she to lose him now--the mere fancy spurred her to fresh
exertions, and in spite of a pain in her side, in spite of clinging
skirts, and shoes that threatened to leave her feet, she pushed on.
She was not far behind Audley when he reached the Yew Walk.

She saw him plunge into it, she followed, and was on the scene not
many seconds later. When she caught sight of the little group kneeling
about the prostrate man, that sense of tragedy, and of the inevitable,
which assails at such a time, shook her. The thing always possible,
never expected, had happened at last.

Then the coolness which women find in these emergencies returned. She
knelt between the men, took the insensible head on her arm, held out
her other hand for the cup. "Has he swallowed any?" she asked, taking
command of the situation.

"No," Toft answered--and she became aware that the man with Lord
Audley was the servant.

She waited for no more, she tilted the cup, and by some knack she
succeeded where Toft had failed. A little of the spirit was swallowed.
She improvised a pillow and laid the head down on it. "The lower the
better," she murmured. She felt the hands and began to rub one. "Rub
the other," she said to Toft. "The first thing to do is to get him
home! Have you a carriage? How near can you bring it, Lord Audley?"

"We can bring it to the park at the end of the walk," he answered. "My
agent has gone to fetch it."

"Will you hasten it?" she replied. "Toft will stay with me. And bring
something, please, on which you can carry him to it."

"At once," Audley answered, and he went off in the direction of the
Great House.

"I've seen him as bad before, Miss," Toft said. "I found that he had
gone out without his hat and I followed him, but I could not trace him
at once. I don't think you need feel alarmed."

Certainly the face had lost its mottled look, the eyes were now shut,
the limbs lay more naturally. "If he were only at home!" Mary
answered. "But every moment he is exposed to the cold is against him.
He must be wet through."

She induced the patient to swallow another mouthful of brandy, and
with their eyes on his face the two watched for the first gleam of
consciousness. It came suddenly. John Audley's eyes opened. He stared
at them.

His mind, however, still wandered. "I knew it!" he muttered. "They
could not be there and I not know it! But the wall! The wall is
thick--thick and----" He was silent again.

The rambling mind is to those who are not wont to deal with it a most
uncanny thing, and Mary looked at Toft to see what he made of it. But
the servant had eyes only for his master. He was gazing at him with an
absorbed face.

"Ay, a thick wall!" the sick man murmured. "They may look and look,
they'll not see through it." He was silent a moment, then, "All bare!"
he murmured. "All bare!" He chuckled faintly, and tried to raise
himself, but sank back. "Fools!" he whispered, "fools, when in ten
minutes if they took out a brick----"

The servant cut him short. "Here's his lordship!" he cried. He spoke
so sharply that Mary looked up in surprise, wondering what was amiss.
Lord Audley was within three or four paces of them--the carpet of yew
leaves had deadened his footsteps. "Here's his lordship, sir!" Toft
repeated in the same tone, his mouth close to John Audley's ear.

The servant's manner shocked Mary. "Hush, Toft!" she said. "Do you
want to startle him?"

"His lordship will startle him," Toft retorted. He looked over his
shoulder, and without ceremony he signed to Lord Audley to stand back.

"Bare, quite bare!" John Audley muttered, his mind still far away.
"But if they took out--if they took out----"

Toft waved his hand again--waved it wildly.

"All right, I understand," Lord Audley said. He had not at first
grasped what was wanted, but the man's repeated gestures enlightened
him. He retired to a position where he was out of the sick man's
sight.

The servant wiped the sweat from his brow. "He mustn't see him!" he
repeated insistently. "Lord! what a turn it gave me. I ask your
pardon, Miss," he continued, "but I know the master so well." He cast
an uneasy glance over his shoulder. "If the master's eyes lit on him
once, only once, when he's in this state, I'd not answer for his
life."

Mary reproached herself. "You are quite right, Toft," she said. "I
ought to have thought of that myself."

"He must not see any strangers!"

"He shall not. You are quite right."

But Toft was still uneasy. He looked round. Stubbs and a man who had
been working in the neighborhood were bringing up a sheep-hurdle, and
again the butler's anxiety overcame him. "D--n!" he said: and he rose
to his feet. "I think they want to kill him amongst them! Why can't
they keep away?"

"Hush! Toft. Why----"

"He mustn't see the lawyer! He must not see him on any account."

Mary nodded. "I will arrange it!" she said. "Only don't excite him.
You will do him harm that way if you are not careful. I will speak to
them."

She went to meet them and explained, while Stubbs, who had not seen
her before, considered her with interest. So this was Miss Audley,
Peter Audley's daughter! She told them that she thought it better that
her uncle should not find strangers about him when he came to himself.
They agreed--it seemed quite natural--and it was arranged that Toft
and the man should carry him as far as the carriage, while Mary walked
beside him; and that afterwards she and Toft should travel with him.
The carriage cushions were placed on the hurdle, and the helpless man
was lifted on to them. Toft and the laborer raised their burden, and
slowly and heavily, with an occasional stagger, they bore it along the
sodden path. Mary saw that the sweat sprang out on Toft's sallow face
and that his knees shook under him. Clearly the man was taxing his
strength to the utmost, and she felt some concern--she had not given
him credit for such fidelity. However, he held out until they reached
the carriage.

Babbling a word now and again, John Audley was moved into the vehicle.
Mary mounted beside him and supported his head, while Toft climbed to
the box, and at a footpace they set off across the sward, the laborer
plodding at the tail of the carriage, and Lord Audley and Stubbs
following a score of paces behind. The rain had ceased, but the clouds
were low and leaden, the trees dripped sadly, and the little
procession across the park had a funereal look. To Mary the way seemed
long, to Toft still longer. With every moment his head was round. His
eyes were now on his master, now jealously cast on those who brought
up the rear. But everything comes to an end, and at length they swung
into the courtyard, where Mrs. Toft, capable and cool, met them and
took a load off Mary's shoulders.

"He's that bad is he?" she said calmly. "Then the sooner he's in his
bed the better. 'Truria's warming it. How will we get him up? I could
carry him myself if that's all. If Toft'll take his feet, I'll do the
rest. No need for another soul to come in!" with a glance at Lord
Audley. "But if they would fetch the doctor I'd not say no, Miss."

"I'll ask them to do that," Mary said.

"And don't you worrit, Miss," Mrs. Toft continued, eyeing the sick man
judicially. "He's been nigh as bad as this before and been about
within the week. There's some as when they wool-gathers, there's no
worse sign. But the master he's never all here, nor all there, and
like a Broseley butter-pot another touch of the kiln will neither make
him nor break him. Now, Toft, wide of the door-post, and steady, man."

Lord Audley and Stubbs had remained outside, but when they saw Mary
coming towards them, the young man left Stubbs and went to meet her.
"How is he?" he asked.

"Mrs. Toft thinks well of him. She has seen him nearly as ill before,
she says. But if he recovers," Mary continued gratefully, "we owe his
life to you. Had you not found him he must have died. And if you had
lost a moment in bringing the news, I am sure that we should have been
too late."

The young man might have given some credit to Stubbs, but he did not;
perhaps because time pressed, perhaps because he felt that his virtue
in resisting a certain temptation deserved its reward. Instead he
looked at Mary with a sympathy so ardent that her eyes fell. "Who
would not have done as much?" he said. "If not for him--for you."

"Will you add one kindness then?" she answered. "Will you send Dr.
Pepper as quickly as possible?"

"Without the loss of a minute," he said. "But one thing before I go. I
cannot come here to inquire, yet I should like to know how he goes on.
Will you walk a little way down the Riddsley road at noon to-morrow,
and tell me how he fares?"

Mary hesitated. But when he had done so much for them, when he had as
good as saved her uncle's life, how could she be churlish? How could
she play the prude? "Of course I will," she said frankly. "I hope I
shall bring a good report."

"Thank you," he said. "Until to-morrow!"




                            CHAPTER XVIII

                           MASKS AND FACES


Cherbuliez opens one of his stories with the remark that if the law of
probabilities ruled, the hero and heroine would never have met, seeing
that the one lived in Venice and the other seldom left Paris. That in
spite of this they fell in with one another was enough to suggest to
the lady that Destiny was at work to unite them.

He put into words a thought which has entertained millions of lovers.
If in face of the odds of three hundred and sixty-four to one Phyllis
shares her birthday with Corydon, if Frederica sprains her ankle and
the ready arm belongs to a Frederic, if Mademoiselle has a _grain de
beaut√©_ on the right ear, and Monsieur a plain mole on the left--here
is at once matter for reverie, and the heart is given almost before
the hands have met.

This was the fourth occasion on which Audley had come to Mary's
rescue, and, sensible as she was, she was too thoroughly woman to be
proof against the suggestion. On three of the four occasions the odds
had been against his appearance. Yet he had come. To-day in
particular, as if no pain that threatened her could be indifferent to
him, as if no trouble approached her but touched a nerve in him, he
had risen from the very ground to help and sustain her.

Could the coldest decline to feel interest in one so strangely linked
with her by fortune? Could the most prudent in such a case abstain
from day dreams, in which love and service, devotion and constancy,
played their parts?

_Sic itur ad astra!_ So men and women begin to love.

She spent the morning between the room in which John Audley was making
a slow recovery, and the deserted library which already wore a cold
and unused aspect. In the one and the other she felt a restlessness
and a disturbance which she was fain to set down to yesterday's alarm.
The old interests invited her in vain. Do what she would, she could
not keep her mind off the appointment before her. Her eyes grew
dreamy, her thoughts strayed, her color came and went. At one moment
she would plunge into a thousand attentions to her uncle, at another
she opened books only to close them. She looked at the clock--surely
the hands were not moving! She looked again--it could not be as late
as that! The truth was that Mary was not in love, but she was ready to
be in love. She was glad and sorry, grave and gay, without reason;
like a stream that dances over the shallows, and rippling and
twinkling goes its way through the sunshine, knowing nothing of the
deep pool that awaits it.

Presently, acting upon some impulse, she opened a drawer in one of the
tables. It contained a portrait in crayons of Peter Basset, which John
Audley had shown her. She took out the sketch and set it against a
book where the light fell upon it, and she examined it. At first with
a smile--that he should have been so mad as to think what he had
thought! And then with a softer look. How hard she had been to him!
How unfeeling! Nay, how cruel!

She sat for a long time looking at the portrait. But in fact she had
forgotten that it was before her, when the clock, striking the
half--hour before noon, surprised her. Then she thrust the portrait
back into its drawer, and went with a composed face to put on her hat.

The past summer had been one of the wettest ever known, for rain had
fallen on five days out of seven. But to-day it was fine, and as Mary
descended the road that led from the house towards Riddsley, a road
open to the vale on one side and flanked on the other by a rising
slope covered with brushwood, a watery sun was shining. Its rays,
aided by the clearness of the air, brought out the colors of stubble
and field, flood and coppice, that lay below. And men looking up
from toil or pleasure, leaning on spades or pausing before they
crossed a stile, saw the Gatehouse transformed to a fairy lodge, gray,
clear--cut, glittering, breaking the line of forest trees--saw it as
if it had stood in another world.

Mary looked back, looked forward, admired, descended. She had made up
her mind that Lord Audley would meet her at a turn near the foot of
the hill, where a Cross had once stood, and where the crumbling base
and moss-clothed steps still bade travellers rest and be thankful.

He was there, and Mary owned the attraction of the big smiling face
and the burly figure, that in a rough, caped riding-coat still kept an
air of fashion. He on his side saw coming to meet him, through the
pale sunshine, not as yesterday an Atalanta, but a cool Dian, with her
hands in a large muff.

"You bring a good report, I hope?" he cried before they met.

"Very good," Mary replied, sparkling a little as she looked at
him--was not the sun shining? "My uncle is much better this morning.
Dr. Pepper says that it was mainly exertion acting on a weak heart. He
expects him to be downstairs in a week and to be himself in a
fortnight. But he will have to be more careful in future."

"That is good!"

"He says, too, that if you had not acted so promptly, my uncle must
have died."

"Well, he was pretty far gone, I must say."

"So, as he will not thank you himself, you must let me thank you." And
Mary held out the hand she had hitherto kept in her muff. She was
determined not to be a prude.

He pressed it discreetly. "I am glad," he said. "Very glad. Perhaps
after this he may think better of me."

She laughed. "I don't think that there is a chance of it," she said.

"No? Well, I suppose it was foolish, but do you know, I did hope that
this might bring us together."

"You may dismiss it," she answered, smiling.

"Ah!" he said. "Then tell me this. How in the world did he come to be
there? Without a hat? Without a coat? And so far from the house?"

Mary hesitated. He had turned, they were walking side by side. "I am
not sure that I ought to tell you," she said. "What I know I gathered
from a word that Mr. Audley let fall when he was rambling. He seems to
have had some instinct, some feeling that you were there and to have
been forced to learn if it was so."

"But forced? By what?" Lord Audley asked. "I don't understand."

"I don't understand either," Mary answered.

"He could not know that we were there?"

"But he seems to have known."

"Strange," he murmured. "Does he often stray away like that?"

"He does, sometimes," she admitted reluctantly.

"Ah!" Audley was silent a moment. Then, "Well, I am glad he is
better," he said in the tone of one who dismisses a subject. "Let us
talk of something else--ourselves. Are you aware that this is the
fourth time that I have come to your rescue?"

"I know that it is the fourth time that you have been very useful,"
she admitted. She wished that she had been able to control her color,
but though he spoke playfully there was meaning in his voice.

"I, too, have a second sense it seems," he said, almost purring as he
looked at her. "Did you by any chance think of me, when you missed
your uncle?"

"Not for a moment," she retorted.

"Perhaps--you thought of Mr. Basset?"

"No, nor of Mr. Basset. Had he been at the Gatehouse I might have. But
he is away."

"Away, is he? Oh!" He looked at her with a whimsical smile. "Do you
know that when he met us the other evening I thought that he was a
little out of temper? It was not a continuance of that which took him
away, I suppose?"

Mary would have given the world to show an unmoved face at that
moment. But she could not. Nor could she feel as angry as she wished.
"I thought we were going to talk of ourselves," she said.

"I thought that we were talking of you."

On that, "I am afraid that I must be going back," she said. And she
stopped.

"But I am going back with you!"

"Are you? Well, you may come as far as the Cross."

"Oh, hang the Cross!" he answered with a masterfulness of which Mary
owned the charm, while she rebelled against it. "I shall come as far
as I like! And hang Basset too--if he makes you unhappy!" He laughed.
"We'll talk of--what shall we talk of, Mary? Why, we are cousins--does
not that entitle me to call you 'Mary'?"

"I would rather you did not," she said, and this time there was no
lack of firmness in her tone. She remembered what Basset had said
about her name and--and for the moment the other's airiness displeased
her.

"But we are cousins."

"Then you can call me cousin," she answered.

He laughed. "Beaten again!" he said.

"And I can call you cousin," she said sedately. "Indeed, I am going to
treat you as a cousin. I want you, if not to do, to think of doing
something for me. I don't know," nervously, "whether I am asking more
than I ought--if so you must forgive me. But it is not for myself."

"You frighten me!" he said. "What is it?"

"It's about Mr. Colet, the curate whom you helped us to save from
those men at Brown Heath. He has been shamefully treated. What they
did to him might be forgiven--they knew no better. But I hear that
because he preaches what is not to everybody's taste, but what
thousands and thousands are saying, he is to lose his curacy. And
that is his livelihood. It seems most wicked to me, because I am told
that no one else will employ him. And what is he to do? He has no
friends----"

"He has one eloquent friend."

"Don't laugh at me!" she cried.

"I am not laughing," he answered. He was, in fact, wondering how he
should deal with this--this fad of hers. A little, too, he was
wondering what it meant. It could not be that she was in love with
Colet. Absurd! He recalled the look of the man. "I am not laughing,"
he repeated more slowly. "But what do you want me to do?"

"To use your influence for him," Mary explained, "either with the
rector to keep him or with some one else to employ him."

"I see."

"He only did what he thought was his duty. And--and because he did it,
is he to pay with all he has in the world?"

"It seems a hard case."

"It is more, it is an abominable injustice!" she cried.

"Yes," he said slowly. "It seems so. It certainly seems hard. But let
me--don't be angry with me if I put another side." He spoke with
careful moderation. "It is my experience that good, easy men, such as
I take the rector of Riddsley to be, rarely do a thing which seems
cruel, without reason. A clergyman, for instance; he has generally
thought out more clearly than you or I what it is right to say in the
pulpit; how far it is lawful, and then again how far it is wise to
deal with matters of debate. He has considered how far a pronouncement
may offend some, and so may render his office less welcome to them.
That is one consideration. Probably, too, he has considered that a
statement, if events falsify it, will injure him with his poorer
parishioners who look up to him as wiser than themselves. Well, when
such a man has laid down a rule and finds a younger clergyman bent
upon transgressing it, is it unreasonable if he puts his foot down?"

"I had not looked at it in that way."

"And that, perhaps, is not all," he resumed. "You know that a thing
may be true, but that it is not always wise to proclaim it. It may be
too strong meat. It may be true, for instance, that corn-dealers make
an unfair profit out of the poor; but it is not a truth that you would
tell a hungry crowd outside the corn-dealer's shop on a Saturday
night."

"No," Mary allowed reluctantly. "Perhaps not."

"And again--I have nothing to say against Colet. It is enough for me
that he is a friend of yours----"

"I have a reason for being interested in him. I am sure that if you
heard him----"

"I might be carried away? Precisely. But is it not possible that he
has seen much of one side of this question, much of the poverty for
which a cure is sought, without being for that reason fitted to decide
what the cure should be?"

Mary nodded. "Have you formed any opinion yourself?" she asked.

But he was too prudent to enter on a discussion. He saw that so far he
had impressed her with what he had said, and he was not going to risk
the advantage he had gained. "No," he said, "I am weighing the matter
at this moment. We are on the verge of a crisis on the Corn Laws, and
it is my duty to consider the question carefully. I am doing so. I
have hitherto been a believer in the tax. I may change my views, but I
shall not do so hastily. As for your friend, I will consider what can
be done, but I fear that he has been imprudent."

"Sometimes," she ventured, "imprudence is a virtue."

"And its own reward!" he retorted. They had passed the Cross, they
were by this time high on the hill, with one accord they came to a
stand. "However, I will think it over," he continued. "I will think it
over, and what a cousin may, a cousin shall."

"A cousin may much when he is Lord Audley."

"A poor man in a fine coat! A butterfly in an east wind." He
removed his curly-brimmed hat and stood gazing over the prospect,
over the wide valley that far and near gleamed with many a sheet of
flood-water. "Have you ever thought, Mary, what that means?" he
continued with feeling. "To be the shadow of a name! A ghost of the
past! To have for home a ruin, and for lands a few poor farms--in
place of all that we can see from here! For all this was once ours. To
live a poor man among the rich! To have nothing but----"

"Opportunities!" she answered, her voice betraying how deeply she was
moved--for she too was an Audley. "For, with all said and done, you
start where others end. You have no need to wait for a hearing. Doors
stand open to you that others must open. Your name is a passport--is
there a Stafford man who does not thrill to it? Surely these things
are something. Surely they are much?"

"You would make me think so!" he exclaimed.

"Believe me, they are."

"They would be if I had your enthusiasm!" he answered, moved by her
words. "And, by Jove," gazing with admiration at her glowing face, "if
I had you by me to spur me on there's no knowing, Mary, what I might
not try! And what I might not do!"

Womanlike, she would evade the crisis which she had provoked. "Or fail
to do!" she replied. "Perhaps the most worthy would be left undone.
But I must go now," she continued. "I have to give my uncle his
medicine. I fear I am late already."

"When shall I see you again?" he asked, trying to detain her.

"Some day, I have no doubt. But good-bye now! And don't forget Mr.
Colet! Good-bye!"

He stood awhile looking after her, then he turned and went down the
hill. By the time he was at the place where he had met her he was glad
that she had broken off the interview.

"I might have said too much," he reflected. "She's handsome enough to
turn any man's head! And not so cold as she looks. And she spells
safety. But there's no hurry--and she's inclined to be kind, or I am
mistaken! That clown, Basset, too, has got his dismissal, I fancy, and
there's no one else!"

Presently his thoughts took another turn. "What maggots women get into
their heads!" he muttered. "That pestilent Colet--I'm glad the rector
acted on my hint. But there it is; when a woman meddles with politics
she's game for the first spouter she comes across! Fine eyes, too, and
the Audley blood! With a little drilling she would hold her own
anywhere."

Altogether, he found the walk to the place where he had left his
carriage pleasant enough and his thoughts satisfactory. With Mary and
safety on one side, and Lady Adela and a plum on the other--it would
be odd if he did not bring his wares to a tolerable market.




                             CHAPTER XIX

                         THE CORN LAW CRISIS


He had been right in his forecast when he told Mary that a political
crisis was at hand. That which had been long whispered, was beginning
to be stated openly in club and market-place. The Corn Laws, the
support of the country, the mainstay, as so many thought, of the
Constitution, were in danger; and behind closed doors, while England
listened without, the doctors were met to decide their fate.

Potatoes! The word flew from mouth to mouth that wet autumn, from town
to country, from village to village. Potatoes! The thing seemed
incredible. That the lordly Corn Laws, the bulwark of the landed
interest, the prop of agriculture, that had withstood all attacks for
two generations, and maintained themselves alike against high prices
and the Corn Law League--that these should go down because a vulgar
root like the potato had failed in Ireland--it was a thing passing
belief. It couldn't be. With the Conservatives in power, it seemed
impossible.

Yet it was certain that the position was grave, if not hopeless. Never
since the Reform Bill had there been such meetings of the Cabinet, so
frequent, so secret. And strange things were said. Some who had
supported Peel yet did not trust him, maintained that this was the
natural sequel of his measures, the point to which he had been moving
through all the years of his Ministry. Potatoes--bah! Others who still
supported him, yet did not trust him, brooded nervously over his
action twenty years before, when he had first resisted and then
accepted the Catholic claims. Tories and Conservatives alike, wondered
what they were there to conserve, if such things were in the wind;
they protested, but with growing misgiving, that the thing could not
be. While those among them who had seats to save and majorities to
guard, met one another with gloomy looks, whispered together in
corners and privately asked themselves what they would do--if he did.
Happy in these circumstances were those who like Mottisfont, the
father, were ready to retire; and still happier those who like
Mottisfont, the son, knew the wishes of their constituents and could
sing "John Barleycorn, my Joe, John," with no fear of being jilted.

Their anxieties--they were politicians--were mainly personal--and
selfish. But there were some, simple people like Mr. Stubbs at
Riddsley, who really believed, when these rumors reached them, that
the foundations of things were breaking up, and that the world in
which they had lived was sinking under their feet. Already in fancy
they saw the glare of furnaces fall across the peaceful fields.
Already they heard the tall mill jar and quiver where the cosey
homestead and the full stackyard sprawled. They saw a weakly race,
slaves to the factory bell, overrun the land where the ploughman still
whistled at his work and his wife suckled healthy babes. To these men,
if the rumors they heard were true, if Peel had indeed sold the pass,
it meant the loss of all. It meant the victory of coal and cotton, the
ruling of all after the Manchester pattern, the reign of Cash, the
Lord, and ten per cent. his profit. It meant the end of the old
England they had loved.

Not that Stubbs said this at Riddsley, or anything like it. He smiled
and kept silence, as became a man who knew much and was set above
common rumor. The landlord of the Audley Arms, the corndealer, the
brewer, the saddler went away from him with their fears allayed merely
by the way in which he shrugged his shoulders. At the farmers'
ordinary he had never been more cheerful. He gave the toast of "Horn
and Corn, gentlemen! And when potatoes take their place you may come
and tell me!" And he gave it so heartily that the farmers went home,
market-peart and rejoicing, laughed at their doubting neighbors, and
quoted a hundred things that Lawyer Stubbs had not said.

But a day or two later the lawyer sustained an unpleasant shock. He
had been little moved by Lord John's manifesto--the declaration in
which the little Whig Leader, seeing that the Government hesitated,
had plumped for total repeal. That was in the common course of things.
It had heartened him, if anything. It was natural. It would bring the
Tories into line and put an end to trimming. But this--this which
confronted him one morning when he opened his London paper was
different. He read it, he held his breath, he stood aghast a long
minute, he swore. After a few minutes he took his hat and the
newspaper, and went round to the house in which Lord Audley lived when
he was at Riddsley.

It was a handsome Georgian house, built of brick with stone facings,
and partly covered with ivy. A wide smooth lawn divided it from the
road. The occupant was a curate's widow who lived there with her two
sisters and eked out their joint means by letting the first floor to
her landlord. For "The Butterflies" was Audley property, and the
clergyman's widow was held to derogate in no way by an arrangement
which differed widely from a common letting of lodgings. Mrs.
Jenkinson was stout, short, and fussy, her sisters were thin, short,
and precise, but all three overflowed with words as kindly as their
deeds. Good Mrs. Jenkinson, in fact, who never spoke of his lordship
behind his back but with distant respect, sometimes forgot in his
presence that he was anything but a "dear young man," and when he had
a cold, would prescribe a posset or a warming-pan with an insistence
which at times amused and more often bored him.

Stubbs found his lordship just risen from a late lunch, and in his
excitement, the lawyer forgot his manners. "By G--d, my lord!" he
cried, "he's resigned."

Audley looked at him with displeasure. "Who's resigned?" he asked
coldly.

"Peel!"

Against that news the young man was not proof. He caught the
infection. "Impossible!" he said, rising to his feet.

"It's true! It's in the _Morning Post_, my lord! He saw the Queen
yesterday. She's sending for Lord John. It's black treachery! It's the
blackest of treachery! With a majority in the House, with the peers in
his pocket, the country quiet, trade improving, everything in his
favor, he's sold us--sold us to Cobden on some d--d pretext of famine
in Ireland!"

Audley did not answer at once. He stood deep in thought, his eyes on
the floor, his hands in his pockets. At length, "I don't follow it,"
he said. "How is Russell, who is in a minority, to carry repeal?"

"Peel's promised his support!" Stubbs cried. Like most honest men, he
was nothing if not thorough. "You may depend upon it, my lord, he has!
He won't deceive me again. I know him through and through, now. He'll
take with him Graham and Gladstone and Herbert, his old tail, Radicals
at heart every man of them, and he's the biggest!"

"Well," Audley said slowly, "he might have done one thing worse. He
might have stayed in and passed repeal himself!"

"Good G--d!" the lawyer cried, "Judas wouldn't have done that! All he
could do, he has done. He has let in corn from Canada, cattle from
Heaven knows where, he has let in wool. All that he has done. But even
he has a limit, my lord! Even he! The man who was returned to support
the Corn Laws--to repeal them. Impossible!"

"Well?" Audley said. "There'll be an election, I suppose?"

"The sooner the better," Stubbs answered vengefully. "And we shall see
what the country thinks of this. In Riddsley we've been ready for
weeks--as you know, my lord. But a General Election? Gad! I only hope
they will put up some one here, and we will give them such a beating
as they've never had!"

Audley pondered. "I suppose Riddsley is safe," he said.

"As safe as Burton Bridge, my lord!"

The other rattled the money in his pocket. "As long as you give them a
lead, Stubbs, I suppose? But if you went over? What then?"

Stubbs opened his eyes. "Went over?" he ejaculated.

"Oh, I don't mean," my lord said airily, "that you're not as staunch
as Burton Bridge. But supposing you took the other side--it would make
a difference, I suppose?"

"Not a jot!" the lawyer answered sturdily.

"Not even if the two Mottisfonts sided with Peel?"

"If they did the old gentleman would never see Westminster again,"
Stubbs cried, "nor the young one go there!"

"Or," Audley continued, setting his shoulders against the
mantel-shelf, and smiling, "suppose I did? If the Beaudelays interest
were cast for repeal? What then?"

"What then?" Stubbs answered. "You'll pardon me, my lord, if I am
frank. Then the Beaudelays influence, that has held the borough time
out of mind, that returned two members before '32, and has returned
one since--there'd be an end of it! It would snap like a rotten stick.
The truth is we hold the borough while we go with the stream. In fair
weather when it is a question of twenty votes one way or the other, we
carry it. And you've the credit, my lord."

Audley moved his shoulders restlessly. "It's all I get by it," he
said. "If I could turn the credit into a snug place of two thousand a
year, Stubbs--it would be another thing. Do you know," he continued,
"I've often wondered why you feel so strongly on the corn-taxes?"

"You asked me that once before, my lord," the agent answered slowly.
"All that I can say is that more things than one go to it. Perhaps the
best answer I can make is that, like your lordship's influence in the
borough, it's part sentiment and part tradition. I have a picture in
my mind--it's a picture of an old homestead that my grandfather lived
in and died in, and that I visited when I was a boy. That would be
about the middle nineties; the French war going, corn high, cattle
high, a good horse in the gig and old ale for all comers. There was
comfort inside and plenty without; comfort in the great kitchen, with
its floor as clean as a pink, and greened in squares with bay leaves,
its dresser bright with pewter, its mantel with Toby jugs! There was
wealth in the stackyard, with the poultry strutting and scratching,
and more in the byres knee-deep in straw, and the big barn where they
flailed the wheat! And there were men and maids more than on two farms
to-day, some in the house, some in thatched cottages with a run on the
common and wood for the getting. I remember, as if they were
yesterday, hot summer afternoons when there'd be a stillness on the
farm and all drowsed together, the bees, and the calves, and the old
sheep-dog, and the only sounds that broke the silence were the cluck
of a hen, or the clank of pattens on the dairy-floor, while the sun
fell hot on the orchard, where a little boy hunted for damsons! That's
what I often see, my lord," Stubbs continued stoutly. "And may Peel
protect me, if I ever raise a finger to set mill and furnace, devil's
dust and slave-grown cotton, in place of that!"

My lord concealed a yawn. "Very interesting, Stubbs," he said. "Quite
a picture! Peace and plenty and old ale! And little Jack Horner
sitting in a corner! No, don't go yet, man. I want you." He made a
sign to Stubbs to sit down, and settling his shoulders more firmly
against the mantel-shelf, he thrust his hands deeper into his
trouser-pockets. "I'm not easy in my mind about John Audley," he said.
"I'm not sure that he has not found something."

Stubbs stared. "There's nothing to find," he said. "Nothing, my lord!
You may be sure of it."

"He goes there."

"It's a craze."

"It's a confoundedly unpleasant one!"

"But harmless, my lord. Really harmless."

The younger man's impatience darkened his face, but he controlled
it--a sure sign that he was in earnest. "Tell me this," he said. "What
evidence would upset us? You told me once that the claim could be
reopened on fresh evidence. On what evidence?"

"I regard the case as closed," Stubbs answered stubbornly. "But if you
put the question--" he seemed to reflect--"the point at issue, on
which the whole turned, was the legitimacy of your great-grandfather,
my lord, Peter Paravicini Audley's son. Mr. John's great-grandfather
was Peter Paravicini's younger brother. The other side alleged, but
could not produce, a family agreement admitting that the son was
illegitimate. Such an agreement, if Peter Paravicini was a party
to it, if it was proved, and came from the proper custody, would
be an awkward document and might let in the next brother's
descendants--that's Mr. John. But in my opinion, its existence is a
fairy story, and in its absence, the entry in the register stands
good."

"But such a document would be fatal?"

"If it fulfilled the conditions it would be serious," the lawyer
admitted. "But it does not exist," he added confidently.

"And yet--I'm not comfortable, Stubbs," Audley rejoined. "I can't get
John Audley's face out of my mind. If ever man looked as if he had his
enemy by the throat, he looked it; a d--d disinheriting face I thought
it! I don't mind telling you," the speaker continued, some disorder in
his own looks, "that I awoke at three o'clock this morning, and I saw
him as clearly as I see you now, and at that moment I wouldn't have
given a thousand pounds for my chance of being Lord Audley this time
two years!"

"Liver!" said Stubbs, unmoved. "Liver, my lord, asking your pardon!
Nothing else--and the small hours. I've felt like that myself. Still,
if you are really uneasy there is always a way out, though it may be
impertinent of me to mention it."

"The old way?"

"You might marry Miss Audley. A handsome young lady, if I may presume
to say so, of your own blood and name, and no disparagement except in
fortune. After Mr. John, she is the next heir, and the match once made
would checkmate any action on his part."

"I am afraid I could not afford such a marriage," Audley said coldly.
"But I am to you. As for this news--" he flicked the newspaper that
lay on the table--"it may be true or it may not. If it is true, it
will alter many things. We shall see. If you hear anything fresh let
me know."

Stubbs said that he would and took his leave, wondering a little, but
having weightier things on his mind. He sought his home by back ways,
for he did not wish to meet Dr. Pepper or Bagenal the brewer, or even
the saddler, until he had considered what face he would put on Peel's
latest move. He felt that his reputation for knowledge and sagacity
was at stake.

Meanwhile his employer, left alone, fell to considering, not what face
he should put upon the matter, but how he might at this crisis turn
the matter and the borough to the best account. Certainly Stubbs was
discouraging, but Stubbs was a fool. It was all very well for him; he
drew his wages either way. But a man of the world did not cling to the
credit of owning a borough for the mere name of the thing. If he were
sensible he looked to get something more from it than that. And it was
upon occasions such as this that the something more was to be had by
those who knew how to go about the business.

Here, in fact, was the moment, if he was the man.




                              CHAPTER XX

                            PETER'S RETURN


Not a word or hint of John Audley's illness had come to Basset's ears.
At the time of the alarm he had been in London, and it was not until
some days later that he took his seat in the morning train to return
to Stafford. On his way to town, and for some days after his arrival,
he had been buoyed up by plans, nebulous indeed, but sufficient. He
came back low in his mind and in poor spirits. The hopes, if not the
aspirations, which Colet's enthusiasm had generated in him had died
down, and the visit to Francis Place had done nothing to revive them.

Some greatness in the man, a largeness of ideas, an echo of the
revolutionary days when the sanest saw visions, Basset was forced to
own. But the two stood too far apart, the inspired tailor and the
country squire, for sympathy. They were divided by too wide a gulf of
breeding and prejudice to come together. Basset was not even a
Radical, and his desire to improve things, and to better the world,
fell very far short of the passion of humanity which possessed the
aged Republican--the man who for half a century had been so forward in
all their movements that his fellows had christened him the "_Old
Postilion_."

Nothing but disappointment, therefore, had come of the meeting. The
two had parted with a little contempt on the one side, a sense of
failure on the other. If a man could serve his neighbors only in
fellowship with such, if the cause which for a few hours had promised
to fill the void left by an unhappy love, could be supported only by
men who held such opinions, then Basset felt that the thing was not
for him. For six or seven days he went up and down London at odds with
himself and his kind, and ever striving to solve a puzzle, the answer
to which evaded him. Was the hope that he might find a mission and
found a purpose on Colet's lines, was it just the desire to set the
world right that seized on young men fresh from college? And if this
were so, if this were all, what was he to do? Whither was he to turn?
How was he going to piece together the life which Mary had broken? How
was he going to arrange his future so that some thread of purpose
might run through it, so that something of effort might still link
together the long bede-roll of years?

He found no answer to the riddle. And it was in a gloomy, unsettled
mood, ill-content with himself and the world, that he took his seat in
the train. Alas, he could not refrain from recalling the May morning
on which he had taken his seat in the same train with Mary. How ill
had he then appreciated her company, how little had he understood, how
little had he prized his good fortune! He who was then free to listen
to her voice, to meet her eyes, to follow the changes of her mood from
grave to gay! To be to her--all that he could! And that for hours, for
days, for weeks!

He swore under his breath and sat back in the shadow of the corner.
And a man who entered late, and saw that he kept his eyes shut,
fancied that he was ill; and when he muttered a word under his breath,
asked him if he spoke.

"No," Basset replied rather curtly. And that he might be alone with
his thoughts he took up a newspaper and held it before him. But not a
word did he read. After a long interval he looked over the journal and
met the other's eyes.

"Surprising news this," the stranger said. He had the look of a
soldier, and the bronzed face of one who had lived under warm skies.

Basset murmured that it was.

"The Whigs have a fine opportunity," the other pursued. "But I am not
sure that they will use it."

"You are a Whig, perhaps?"

The stranger smiled. "No," he replied. "I am not. I have lived so long
abroad that I belong to no party. I am an Englishman."

"Ah?" Basset rejoined, curiosity beginning to stir in him. "That's
rather a fine idea."

"Apparently it's a novel one. But it seems natural to me. I have lived
for fifteen years in India and I have lost touch with the cant of
parties. Out there, we do honestly try to rule for the good of the
people; their prosperity is our interest. Here, during the few weeks I
have spent in England I see things done, not because they are good,
but because they suit a party, or provide a cry, or put the other side
in a quandary."

"There's a good deal of that, I suppose."

"Still," the stranger continued, "I know a great man, and I know a
fine thing when I see them. And I fancy that I see them here!" He
tapped his paper.

"Has Lord John formed his ministry, then?"

"No, I am not sure that he will. I am not thinking of him, I am
thinking of Peel."

"Oh! Of Peel?"

"He has done a fine thing! As every man does who puts what is right
before what is easy. May I tell you a story of myself?" the Indian
continued. "Some years ago in the Afghan war I was unlucky enough
to command a small frontier post. My garrison consisted of two
companies and six or seven European officers. The day came when I had
to choose between two courses. I must either hold my ground until our
people advanced, or I must evacuate the post, which had a certain
importance--and fall back into safety. The men never dreamed of
retiring. The officers were confident that we could hold out. But we
were barely supplied for forty days, and in my judgment no
reinforcement was possible under seventy. I made my choice, breached
the place, and retired. But I tell you, sir, that the days of that
retreat, with sullen faces about me, and hardly a man in my company
who did not think me a poltroon, were the bitterest of my life. I knew
that if the big-wigs agreed with them I was a ruined man, and after
ten years service I should go home disgraced. Fortunately the General
saw it as I saw it, and all was well. But--" he looked at Basset with
a wry smile--"it was a march of ten days to the base, and to-day the
sullen looks of those men come back to me in my dreams."

"And you think," Basset said--the other's story had won his
respect--"that Peel has found himself in such a position?"

"To compare great issues with small, I do. I suspect that he has gone
through an agony--that is hardly too strong a word--such as I went
through. My impression is that when he came into office he was in
advance of his party. He saw that the distress in the country called
for measures which his followers would accept from no one else. He
believed that he could carry them with him. Perhaps, even then, he
held a repeal of the Corn Laws possible in some remote future; perhaps
he did not, I don't know. For suddenly there came on him the fear of
this Irish famine--and forced his hand."

"But don't you think," Basset asked, "that the alarm is premature?" A
dozen times he had heard the famine called a flam, a sham, a bite,
anything but a reality.

"You have never seen a famine?" the other replied gravely. "You have
never had to face the impossibility of creating food where it does not
exist, or of bringing it from a distance when there are no roads. I
have had that experience. I have seen people die of starvation by
hundreds, women, children, babes, when I could do nothing because
steps had not been taken in time. God forbid that that should happen
in Ireland! If the fear does not outrun the dearth, God help the poor!
Now I am told that Peel witnessed a famine in Ireland about '17 or
'18, and knows what it is."

"You have had interesting experiences?"

"The experience of every Indian officer. But the burden which rests on
us makes us alive to the difficulties of a statesman's position. I see
Peel forced--forced suddenly, perhaps, to make a choice; to decide
whether he shall do what is right or what is consistent. He must
betray his friends, or he must betray his country. And the agony of
the decision is the greater if he has it burnt in on his memory that
he did this thing once before, that once before he turned his back on
his party--and that all the world knows!"

"I see."

"If a man in that position puts self, consistency, reputation all
behind him--believe me, he is doing a fine thing."

Basset assented. "But you speak," he added, "as if Sir Robert were
going to do the thing himself--instead of merely standing aside for
others to do it."

"A distinction without much difference," the other rejoined. "Possibly
it will turn out that he is the only man who can do it. If so, he will
have a hard row to hoe. He will need the help of every moderate man in
the country, if he is not to be beaten. For whether he succeeds or
fails, depends not upon the fanatics, but upon the moderate men. I
don't know what your opinions are?"

"Well," Basset said frankly, "I am not much of a party-man myself. I
am inclined to agree with you, so far."

"Then if you have any influence, use it. Unfortunately, I am out of it
for family reasons."

Basset looked at the stranger. "You are not by any chance Colonel
Mottisfont?" he said.

"I am. You know my brother? He is member for Riddsley."

"Yes. My name is Basset."

"Of Blore? Indeed. I knew your father. Well, I have not cast my seed
on stony ground. Though you are stony enough about Wootton under
Weaver."

"True, worse luck. Your brother is retiring, I hear?"

"Yes, he has just horse sense, has Jack. He won't vote against Peel.
His lad has less and will take his place and vote old Tory. But there,
I mustn't abuse the family."

They had still half an hour to spend together before Basset got out at
Stafford. He had time to discover that the soldier was faced by a
problem not unlike his own. His service over, he had to consider what
he would do. "All I know," the Colonel said breezily, "is that I won't
do nothing. Some take to preaching, others to Bath, but neither will
suit me. But I'll not drift. I kept from brandy pawnee out there, and
I am going to keep from drift here. For you, you're a young man,
Basset, and a hundred things are open to you. I am over the top of the
hill. But I'll do something."

"You have done something to-day," Basset said. "You have done me
good."

Later he had time to think it over during the long journey from
Stafford to Blore. He drove by twisting country roads, under the gray
walls of Chartley, by Uttoxeter and Rocester. Thence he toiled uphill
to the sterile Derbyshire border, the retreat of old families and old
houses. He began to think that he had gained some ideas with which he
could sympathize, ideas which were at one with Mary Audley's burning
desire to help, while they did not clash with old prejudices. If he
threw himself into Peel's cause, he would indeed be seen askance by
many. He would have to put himself forward after a fashion that gave
him the goose-flesh when he thought of it. A landowner, he would have
to go against the land. But he would not feel, in his darker moods,
that he was the dupe of cranks and fanatics. He saw Peel as Mottisfont
had pictured him, as a man putting all behind him except the right;
and his heart warmed to the picture. Many would fall away, few would
be staunch. From this ship, as from every sinking ship, the rats would
flee. But so much the stronger was the call.

The result was that the Peter Basset who descended at the porch of the
old gabled house, that sat low and faced east in the valley under
Weaver, was a more hopeful man than he who had entered the train at
Euston. A purpose, a plan--he had gained these, and the hope that
springs from them.

He had barely doffed his driving-coat, however, before his thoughts
were swept in another direction. On the hall table lay two letters. He
took up one. It was from Colet and written in deep dejection. "The
barber was a Tory and had given him short notice. Feeling ran high in
the town, and other lodgings were not to be had. The Bishop had
supported the rector's action, and he saw no immediate prospect of
further work." He did not ask for shelter, but it was plain that he
was at his wit's end, and more than a little surprised by the storm
which he had raised.

Basset threw down the letter. "He shall come here," he thought. "What
is it to me whom he marries?" Many solitary hours spent in the streets
of London had gone some way towards widening Peter's outlook.

He took up the second letter. It was from John Audley, and before
he had read three lines, he rang the bell and ordered that the
post-chaise which had brought him from Stafford should be kept: he
would want it in the morning. John Audley wrote that he had been very
ill--he was still in bed. He must see Basset. The matter was urgent,
he had something to tell him. He hinted that if he did not come
quickly it might be too late.

Basset could not refuse to go; summoned after this fashion, he must
go. But he tried to believe that he was not glad to go. He tried to
believe that the excitement with which he looked forward to the
journey had to do with his uncle. It was in vain; he knew that he
tricked himself. Or if he did not know this then, his eyes were opened
next day, when, after walking up the hill to spare the horses--and a
little because he shrank at the last from the meeting--he came in
sight of the Gatehouse, and saw Mary Audley standing in the doorway.
The longing that gripped him then, the emotion that unmanned him, told
him all. It was of Mary he had been thinking, towards Mary he had been
travelling, of her work it was that the miles had seemed leagues! He
was not cured. He was not in the way to be cured. He was the same
love-sick fool whom she had driven from her with contumely an age--it
seemed an age, ago.

He bent his head as he approached, that she might not see his face.
His knees shook and a tremor ran through him. Why had he come back?
Why had he come back to face this anguish?

Then he mastered himself; indeed he took himself the more strongly in
hand for the knowledge he had gained. When they met at the door it was
Mary, not he, whose color came and went, who spoke awkwardly, and
rushed into needless explanations. The man listened with a stony face,
and said little, almost nothing.

After the first awkward greeting, "Your room has been airing," she
continued, avoiding his eyes. "My uncle has been expecting you for
some days. He has asked for you again and again."

He explained that he had been in London--hence the delay; and,
further, that he must return to Blore that day. She felt that she was
the cause of this, and she colored painfully. But he seemed to be
indifferent. He noticed a trifling change in the hall, asked a
question or two about his uncle's state, and inquired what had caused
his sudden illness.

She told the story, giving details. He nodded. "Yes, I have seen him
in a similar attack," he said. "But he gets older. I am afraid it
alarmed you?"

She forced herself to describe Lord Audley's part in the matter--and
Mr. Stubbs's, and was conscious that she was dragging in Mr. Stubbs
more often than was necessary. Basset listened politely, remarked that
it was fortunate that Audley had been on the spot, added that he was
sure that everything had been done that was right.

When he had gone upstairs to see John Audley she escaped to her room.
Her cheeks were burning, and she could have cried. Basset's coldness,
his distance, the complete change in his manner all hurt her more than
she could say. They brought home to her, painfully home to her what
she had done. She had been foolish enough to fling away the friend,
when she need only have discarded the lover!

But she must face it out now, the thing was done, and she must put up
with it. And by and by, fearing that Basset might suppose that she
avoided him, she came down and waited for him in the deserted library.
She had waited some minutes, moving restlessly to and fro and wishing
the ordeal of luncheon were over, when her eyes fell on the door of
the staircase that led up to her uncle's room. It was ajar.

She stared at it, for she knew that she had closed it after Basset had
gone up. Now it was ajar. She reflected. The house was still, she
could hear no one moving. She went out quickly, crossed the hall,
looked into the dining-room. Toft was not there, nor was he in the
pantry. She returned to the library, and went softly up the stairs.

So softly that she surprised the man before he could raise his head
from the keyhole. He saw that he was detected, and for an instant he
scowled at her in the half-light of the narrow passage, uncertain what
to do. Mary beckoned to him, and went down before him to the library.

There she turned on him. "Shut the door," she said. "You were
listening! Don't deny it. You have acted disgracefully, and it will be
my duty to tell Mr. Audley what has happened."

The man, sallow with fear, tried to brave it out.

"You will only make mischief, Miss," he said sullenly. "You'll come
near to killing the master."

"Very good!" Mary said, quivering with indignation. "Then instead of
telling Mr. Audley I shall tell Mr. Basset. It will be for him to
decide whether Mr. Audley shall know. Go now."

But Toft held his ground. "You'll be doing a bad day's work, Miss," he
said earnestly. "I want to run straight." He raised his hand to his
forehead, which was wet with perspiration. "I swear I do! I want to
run straight."

"Straight!" Mary cried in scorn. "And you listen at doors!"

The man made a last attempt to soften her. "For God's sake, be warned,
Miss!" he cried. "Don't drive me. If you knew as much as I do----"

"I should not listen to learn the rest!" replied Mary without pity.
"That is enough. Please to see that lunch is ready." She pointed to
the door. She was not an Audley for nothing.

Toft gave way and went, and she remained alone, perplexed as well as
angry. Mrs. Toft and Etruria were good simple folk; she liked them.
But Toft had puzzled her from the first. He was so silent, so
secretive, he was for ever appearing without warning and vanishing
without noise. She had often suspected that he spied on his master.

But she had never caught him in the act, and the certainty that he did
so, filled her with dismay. It was fortunate, she thought, that Basset
was there, and that she could consult him. And the instant that he
appeared, forgetting their quarrel and the strained relations between
them, she poured out her story. Toft was ungrateful, treacherous, a
danger! With Mr. Audley so helpless, the house so lonely, it
frightened her.

It was only when she had run on for some time that Basset's air of
detachment struck her. He listened, with his back to the fire, and his
eyes bent on the floor, but he did not speak until she had told her
story, and expressed her misgivings.

When he did, "I am not surprised," he said. "I've suspected this for
some time. But I don't know that anything can be done."

"Do you mean that--you would do nothing?"

"The truth is," he answered, "Toft is pretty far in his master's
confidence. And what he does not know he wishes to know. When he knows
it, he will find it a mare's nest. The truth--as I see it at any
rate--is that your uncle is possessed by a craze. He wants me to help
him in it. I cannot. I have told him so, firmly and finally, to-day.
Well, I suspect that he will now turn to Toft. I hope not, but he may,
and if we report the man's misconduct, it will only precipitate
matters and hasten an understanding. That is the position, and if I
were you, I should let the matter rest."

"You mean that?" she exclaimed.

"I do."

"But--but I have spoken to Toft!" Her eyes were bright with anger.

He kept his on the floor. It was only by maintaining the distance
between them that he could hope to hide what he felt. "Still I would
let him be," he repeated. "I do not think that Toft is dangerous. He
has surprised one half of a secret, and he wishes to learn the other
half. That is all."

"And I am to take no notice?"

"I believe that will be your wisest course."

She was shocked, and she was still more hurt. He pushed her aside, he
pushed her out of his confidence, out of her uncle's confidence! His
manner, his indifference, his stolidity showed that she had not only
killed his fancy for her at a stroke, but that he now disliked her.

And still she protested. "But I must tell my uncle!" she cried.

"I think I would not," he repeated. "But there--" he paused and looked
at his watch--"I am afraid that if you are going to give me lunch I
must sit down. I've a long journey before me."

Then she saw that no more could be said, and with an effort she
repressed her feelings. "Yes," she said, "I was forgetting. You must
be hungry."

She led the way to the dining-room, and sat down with him, Toft
waiting on them with the impassive ease of the trained man. While they
ate, Basset talked of indifferent things, of his journey from town, of
the roads, of London, of Colonel Mottisfont--an interesting man whom
he had met in the train. And as he talked, and she made lifeless
answers, her indignation cooled, and her heart sank.

She could have cried, indeed. She had lost her friend. He was gone to
an immense distance. He was willing to leave her to deal with her
troubles and difficulties, it might be, with her dangers. In killing
his love with cruel words--and how often had she repented, not of the
thing, but of the manner!--she had killed every feeling, every liking,
that he had entertained for her.

It was clear that this was so, for to the last he maintained his
coldness and indifference. When he was gone, when the sound of the
chaise-wheels had died in the distance, she felt more lonely than she
had ever felt in her life. In her Paris days she had had no reason to
blame herself, and all the unturned leaves of life awaited her. Now
she had turned over one page, and marred it, she had won a friend and
lost him, she had spoiled the picture, which she had not wished to
keep!

Her uncle lay upstairs, ready to bear, but hardly welcoming her
company. He had his secrets, and she stood outside them. She sat
below, enclosed in and menaced by the silence of the house. Yet it was
not fear that she felt so much as a sadness, a great depression, a
gray despondency. She craved something, she did not know what. She
only knew that she was alone--and sad.

She tried to fight against the feeling. She tried to read, to work,
even to interest herself in Toft and his mystery. She failed. And at
last she gave up the attempt and with her elbows on her knees and her
eyes on the fire she fell to musing, the ticking of the tall clock and
the fall of the embers the only sounds that broke the stillness of the
shadowy room.




                             CHAPTER XXI

                       TOFT AT THE BUTTERFLIES


Basset's view of Toft, if it did not hit, came very near the mark. For
many years the man had served his master with loyalty, the relations
between them being such as were common in days when servants stayed
long in a place and held themselves a part of the family. The master
had been easy, the man had had no ambitions beyond those of his
fellows, and no temptations except those which turned upon the
cellar-book.

But a year before Mary Audley's arrival two things had happened. First
the curate had fallen in love with Etruria, and the fact had become
known to her father, to whom the girl was everything. Her refinement,
her beauty, her goodness were his secret delight. And the thought that
she might become a lady, that she might sit at the table at which he
served had taken hold of the austere man's mind and become a passion.
He was ready to do anything and to suffer anything to bring this
about. Nor was he deceived when Etruria put the offer aside. She was
nothing if not transparent, and he was too fond of her not to see that
her happiness was bound up with the man who had stooped to woo her.

He was not blind to the difficulties or to the clergyman's poverty.
But he saw that Colet, poor as he was, could raise his daughter in the
social scale; and he spent long hours in studying how the marriage
might be brought about. He hugged the matter to him, and brooded over
it, but he never discovered his thoughts or his hopes either to his
wife, or to Etruria.

Then one day the sale of a living happened to be discussed in his
presence, and as he went, solemn and silent, round the table he
listened. He learned that livings could be bought. He learned that the
one in question, with its house and garden and three hundred a year,
had fetched a thousand guineas, and from that day Toft's aim was by
hook or crook to gain a thousand guineas. He revelled in impossible
dreams of buying a living, of giving it to Etruria, and of handing
maid and dowry to the fortunate man who was to make her a lady.

There have been more sordid and more selfish ambitions.

But a thousand guineas was a huge sum to the manservant. True, he had
saved a hundred and twenty pounds, and for his position in life he
held himself a rich man. But a thousand guineas? He turned the matter
this way and that, and sometimes he lost hope, and sometimes he pinned
his faith to a plan that twenty-four hours showed to be futile. All
the time his wife who lay beside him, his daughter who waited on him,
his master on whom he waited, were as far from seeing into his mind as
if they had lived in another planet.

Then the second thing happened. He surprised, wholly by chance, a
secret which gave him a hold over John Audley. Under other
circumstances he might have been above using the advantage; as it was,
he was tempted. He showed his hand, a sum of four hundred pounds was
named; for a week he fancied that he had performed half his task. Then
his master explained with a gentle smile that to know and to prove
were two things, and that whereas Toft had for a time been able to do
both, John Audley had now destroyed the evidence. The master had in
fact been too sly for the man, and Toft found himself pretty well
where he had been. In the end Audley thought it prudent to give him a
hundred pounds, which did but whet his desire and sharpen his wits.

For he had now tasted blood. He had made something by a secret. There
might be others to learn. He kept his eyes open, and soon he became
aware of his master's disappearances. He tracked him, he played the
spy, he discovered that John Audley was searching for something in the
Great House. The words that the old man let fall, while half-conscious
in the Yew Walk, added to his knowledge, and at the same time scared
him. A moment later, and Lord Audley might have known as much as he
knew--and perhaps more!

For he did not as yet know all, and it was in the attempt to complete
his knowledge that Mary had caught him listening at the door. The blow
was a sharp one. He was still so far unspoiled, still so near the old
Toft that he could not bear that his wife and daughter should learn
the depth to which he had fallen. And John Audley? What would he do,
if Mary told him?

Toft could not guess. He knew that his master was barely sane, if he
was sane; but he knew also that he was utterly inhuman. John Audley
would put him and his family to the door without mercy if that seemed
to him the safer course. And that meant an end of all his plans for
Etruria, for Colet, for them all.

True, he might use such power as he had. But it was imperfect, and in
its use he must come to grips with one who had shown himself his
better both in courage and cunning. He had imbibed a strong fear of
his master, and he could not without a qualm contemplate a struggle
with him.

For a week after his detection by Mary, he went about his work in a
fever of anxiety. And nothing happened; it was that which tried him.
More than once he was on the point of throwing himself at her feet, of
telling her all he knew, of imploring her pardon. It was only her
averted eyes and cold tone that held him back.

Such a crisis makes a man either better or worse, and it made Toft
worse. At the end of three days a chance word put a fine point on his
fears and stung him to action. He might not know enough to face John
Audley, but he thought that he knew enough to sell his secret--in the
other camp. His lordship was young and probably malleable. He would go
to him and strike a bargain.

Arrived at this point the man did not hide from himself that he was
going to do a hateful thing. He thought of his wife and her wonder
could she know. He thought of Etruria's mild eyes and her goodness.
And he shivered. But it was for her. It was for them. Within
twenty-four hours he was in Riddsley.

As he passed the Maypole, where Mr. Colet had his lodgings, he noticed
that the town wore an unusual aspect. Groups of men stood talking in
the doorway, or on the doorsteps. A passing horseman was shouting to a
man at a window. Nearer the middle of the town the stir was greater.
About the saddler's door, about the steps leading up to the Audley
Arms, and round the yard of the inn, knots of men argued and
gesticulated. Toft asked the saddler what it was.

"Haven't you heard?"

