"But they've always voted right!" Stubbs urged, with a sinking heart.
"What's taken them?"

"If you ask me," the clerk answered, "I should say it was partly
Squire Basset--he talks straight and it takes. And partly the split.
When a party splits you can't expect to keep all. I doubted Dyas from
the first. He's the head. They were all at his house last night and a
prime supper he gave them."

Stubbs groaned. At last, "How much?" he asked.

Farthingale shook his head. "Nix," he said. "You may be shaking Dyas's
hand and find it's Hatton's. If you take my advice, you'll leave it
alone."

"Well," the lawyer cried, "of all the d--d ingratitude I ever heard
of! The money Dyas has had from me!"

Farthingale's lips framed the words "only veal," but no sound came.
Devoted as he was to his employer, he was enjoying himself. Election
times were meat and drink--especially drink--to him. At such times his
normal wage was royally swollen by Election extras, such as: "To
addressing one hundred circulars, one guinea. To folding and closing
the same, half a guinea. To watering the same, half a guinea. To
posting the same, half a guinea." A whole year's score, chalked up
behind the door at the Portcullis, vanished as by magic at this
season.

And then he loved the importance of it, and the secrecy, and the
confidence that was placed in him and might safely be placed. The
shabby clerk who had greased many a palm was himself above bribes.

But Stubbs was aghast. Scarcely could he keep panic at bay. He had
staked his reputation for sagacity on the result. He had made himself
answerable for success, to his lordship, to the candidate, to the
party. Not once, but twice, he had declared in secret council that
defeat was impossible--impossible! Had he not done so, the contest,
which his own side had invited, might have been avoided.

And then, too, his heart was in the matter. He honestly believed that
these poor creatures, these weaklings whose defection might cost so
much, were voting for the ruin of their children, for the
impoverishment of the town. They would live to see the land pass into
the hands of men who would live on it, not by it. They would live to
see the farmers bankrupt, the country undersold, the town a desert!

The lawyer had counted on a safe majority of twenty-two on a register
of a hundred and ninety voters. And twenty-two had seemed a buckler,
sufficient against all the shafts and all the spite of fortune. But a
majority of four--for that was all that remained if these nine went
over--a majority of four was a thing to pale the cheek. Perspiration
stood on his brow as he thought of it. His hand shook as he shuffled
the papers on his desk, looking for he knew not what. For a moment he
could not face even Farthingale, he could not command his eye or his
voice.

At last, "Who could get at Dyas?" he muttered.

Farthingale pondered for a time, but shook his head. "No one," he
said. "You might try Hayward if you like. They deal."

"What's to be done, then?"

"There's only one way that I can think of," the clerk replied, his
eyes on his master's face. "Rattle them! Set the farmers on them! Show
them that what they're doing will be taken ill. Show 'em we're in
earnest. Badger's a poor creature and Thomas's wife's never off the
twitter. I'd try it, if I were you. You'd pull some back."

They talked for a time in low voices and before he went into the
Portcullis that night Farthingale ordered a gig to be ready at
daylight.

It might have been thought that with this unexpected gain, Basset
would be in clover. But he, too, had his troubles and vexations. John
Audley's death and Mary's loneliness had made drafts on his time as
well as on his heart. For a week he had almost withdrawn from the
contest, and when he returned to it it was to find that the extreme
men--as is the way of extreme men--had been active. In his address and
in his speeches he had declared himself a follower of Peel. He had
posed as ready to take off the corn-tax to meet an emergency, but not
as convinced that free trade was always and everywhere right. He had
striven to keep the question of Irish famine to the front, and had
constantly stated that that which moved his mind was the impossibility
of taxing food in one part of the country while starvation reigned in
another. Above all, he had tried to convey to his hearers his notion
of Peel. He had pictured the statesman's dilemma as facts began to
coerce him. He had showed that in the same position many would have
preferred party to country and consistency to patriotism. He had
painted the struggle which had taken place in the proud man's mind. He
had praised the decision to which Peel had come, to sacrifice his
name, his credit, and his popularity to his country's good.

But when Basset returned to his Committee Room, he found that the men
to whom Free Trade was the whole truth, and to whom nothing else was
the truth, had stolen a march on him. They had said much which he
would not have said. They had set up Cobden where he had set up Peel.
To crown all, they had arranged an open-air meeting, and invited a man
from Lancashire--whose name was a red rag to the Tories--to speak at
it.

Basset was angry, but he could do nothing. He had an equal distaste
for the man and the meeting, but his supporters, elated by their
prospects, were neither to coax nor hold. For a few hours he thought
of retiring. But to do so at the eleventh hour would not only expose
him to obloquy and injure the cause, but it would condemn him to an
inaction from which he shrank.

For all that he had seen of Mary, and all that he had done for her,
had left him only the more restless and more unhappy. To one in such a
mood success, which began to seem possible, promised something--a new
sphere, new interests, new friends. In the hurly-burly of the House
and amid the press of business, the wound that pained him would heal
more quickly than in the retirement of Blore; where the evenings would
be long and lonely, and many a time Mary's image would sit beside his
fire and regret would gnaw at his heart.

The open-air meeting was to be held at the Maypole, in the wide street
bordered by quaint cottages, that served the town for a cattle-market.
The day turned out to be mild for the season, the meeting was a
novelty, and a few minutes before three the Committee began to
assemble in strength at the Institute, which stood no more than a
hundred yards from the Maypole, but in another street. Hatton was
entertaining Brierly, the speaker from Lancashire, and in making him
known to the candidate, betrayed a little too plainly that he thought
that he had scored a point.

"You'll see something new now, sir," he said, rubbing his hands.
"What's wanting, he'll win! He's addressed as many as four thousand
persons at one time, Mr. Brierly has!"

"Ay, and not such as are here, Squire," Brierly boomed. He was a tall,
bulky man with an immense chin, who moved his whole body when he
turned his head. "Not country clods, but Lancashire men! No throwing
dust i' their eyes!"

"Still, I hope you'll deal with us gently," Basset said. "Strong meat,
Mr. Brierly, is not for babes. We must walk before we can run."

"Nay, but the emptier the stomach, the more need o' meat!" Brierly
replied, and he rumbled with laughter. "An' a bellyful I'll give them!
Truth's truth and I'm no liar!"

"But to different minds the same words do not convey the same thing,"
Basset urged.

The man stared over his stiff neck-cloth. "That'ud not go down i'
Todmorden," he said. "Nor i' Burnley nor i' Bolton! We're down-right
chaps up North, and none for chopping words. Hands off the hands'
loaf, is Lancashire gospel, and we're out to preach it! We're out to
preach it, and them that clems folk and fats pheasants may make what
mouth o'er it they like!"

Fortunately the order to start came at this moment, and Basset had to
fall in and move forward with Hatton, the chairman of the day.
Banfield followed with the stranger, and the rest of the Committee
came on two by two, the smaller men enjoying the company in which
they found themselves. So they marched solemnly into the street, a
score of Hatton's men forming a guard of honor, and a long tail of the
riff-raff of the town falling in behind with orange flags and favors.
These at a certain signal set up a shrill cheer, a band struck up
"See, the Conquering Hero Comes!" and the sixteen gentlemen marched,
some proudly and some shamefacedly, into the wider street, wherein a
cart drawn up at the foot of the Maypole awaited them.

On such occasions Englishmen out of uniform do not show well. The
daylight streamed without pity on the Committee as they stalked or
shambled along in their Sunday clothes, and Basset at least felt the
absurdity of the position. With the tail of his eye he discerned that
the stranger was taking off a large white hat, alternately to the
right and left, in acknowledgment of the cheers of the crowd, while
ominous sniggers of laughter mingled here and there with the applause.
Banfield's men, with another hundred or so of the town idlers, were
gathered about the cart, but of the honest and intelligent voters
there were scanty signs.

The crowd greeted the appearance of each of the principals with cheers
and a shaft or two of Stafford wit.

"Hooray! Hooray!" shouted Hatton's men as he climbed into the cart.

"Hatton's a great man now!" a bass voice threw in.

"But he's never lost his taste for tripe!" squeaked a shrill treble.
The gibe won roars of laughter, and the back of the chairman's neck
grew crimson.

"Hurrah for Banfield and the poor man's loaf!" shouted his supporters,
as he mounted in his turn.

"It's little of the crumb he'll leave the poor man!" squeaked the
treble.

It was the candidate's turn to mount next. "Hooray! Hooray!" shouted
the crowd with special fervor. Handkerchiefs were waved from windows,
the band played a little more of the Conquering Hero.

As the music ceased, "What's he doing, Tommy, along o' these chaps?"
asked the treble voice.

"He's waiting for that there Samaritan, Sammy?" answered the bass.

"Ay, ay? And the wine and oil, Sammy?"

It took the crowd a little time to digest this, but in time they did
so, and the gust of laughter that followed covered the appearance of
the stranger. He was not to escape, however, for as the noise ceased,
"Is this the Samaritan, Sammy?" asked the bass.

"Where's your eyes?" whined the treble. "He's the big loaf! and, lor,
ain't he crumby!"

"If I were down there----" the Burnley man began, leaning over the
side of the cart.

"He's crusty, too!" cried the wit.

But this was too much for the chairman. "Silence! Silence!" he cried,
and, as at a signal, there was a rush, the two interrupters were
seized and, surrounded by a gang of hobbledehoys, were hustled down
the road, fighting furiously and shouting, "Blues! Blues!"

The chairman made use of the lull to step to the edge of the cart and
take off his hat. He looked about him, pompous and important.

"Gentlemen," he began, "free and independent electors of our ancient
borough! At a crisis such as this, a crisis the most momentous--the
most momentous----" he paused and looked into his hat, "that history
has known, when the very staff of life is, one may say, the apple of
discord, it is an honor to me to take the chair!"

"The cart you mean!" cried a voice, "you're in the cart!"

The speaker cast a withering glance in the direction whence the voice
came, lost his place and, failing to find it, went on in a different
strain. "I'm a business man," he said, "you all know that! I'm a
business man, and I'm not ashamed of it. I stick to my business and my
business to-day----"

"Better go on with it!"

But he was getting set, and he was not to be abashed. "My business
to-day," he repeated, "is to ask your attention for the distinguished
candidate who seeks your suffrages, and for the--the distinguished
gentleman on my left who will presently follow me."

A hollow groan checked him at this point, but he recovered himself.
"First, however," he continued, "I propose, with your permission, to
say a word on the--the great question of the day--if I may call it so.
It is to the food of the people I refer!"

He paused for cheers, under cover of which Banfield murmured to his
neighbor that Hatton was set now for half an hour. He had yet to learn
that open-air meetings have their advantages.

"The food of the people!" Hatton repeated, uplifted by the applause.
"It is to me a sacred thing! My friends, it is to me the Ark of the
Covenant. The bread is the life. It should go straight, untaxed,
untouched from the field of the farmer to the house of--of the widow
and the orphan!"

"Hear! Hear! Hear! Hear!" Then, "What about the miller?"

"It should go from where it is grown," Hatton repeated, "to where it
is needed; from where it is grown to the homes of the poor! And to the
man," slipping easily and fatally into his Sunday vein, "that lays his
'and upon it, let him be whom he may, I say with the Book, 'Thou shalt
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn!' The Law, ay, and the
Prophets----"

"Ay, Hatton's profits! Hands off them!" roared the bass voice.

"Low bread and high profits!" shrieked the treble. "Hatton and thirty
per cent!"

A gust of laughter swept all away for a time, and when the speaker
could again get a hearing he had lost his thread and his temper.
"That's a low insinuation!" he cried, crimson in the face. "A low
insinuation! I scorn to answer it!"

"Regular old Puseyite you be," shouted a new tormentor. "Quoting
Scripture."

Hatton shook his fist at the crowd. "A low, dirty insinuation!" he
cried. "I scorn----"

"You don't scorn the profits!"

"Listen! Silence!" Then, "I shall not say another word! You're not
worth it! You're below it! I call on Mr. Brierly of Manchester to
propose a resolution."

And casting vengeful glances here and there where he fancied he
detected an opponent, he stood back. He began for the first time to
think the meeting a mistake. Basset, who had held that opinion from
the first, scanned the crowd and had his misgivings.

The man from Manchester, however, had none. He stood forward, a smile
on his broad face, his chest thrown forward, a something easy in his
air, as became one who had confronted thousands and was not to be put
out of countenance by a few hisses. He waited good-humoredly for
silence. Nor could he see that, behind the cart, there had been
gathering for some time a band of men of a different air from those
who faced the platform. These men were still coming up by twos and
threes, issuing from side-streets; men clad in homespun and with ruddy
faces, men in smocked frocks, men in velveteens; a few with belcher
neckerchiefs and slouched felts, whom their mothers would not have
known. When Brierly raised his hand and opened his mouth there were
over two score of these men--and they were still coming up.

But Brierly was unaware of them, and, complacent and confident of the
effect he would produce, he opened his mouth.

"Gentlemen," he began. His voice, strong and musical, reached the edge
of the meeting. "Gentlemen, free electors! And I tell you straight no
man is free, no man had ought to be free----"

Boom! and again, Boom! Boom! Not four paces behind him a drum rolled
heavily, drowning his voice. He stopped, his mouth open; for an
instant surprise held the crowd also. Then laughter swept the meeting
and supplied a treble to the drum's persistent bass.

And still the drum went on, Boom! Boom! amid cheers, yells, laughter.
Then, as suddenly as it had started, it stopped. More slowly, the
hurrahs, yells, laughter, died down, the laughter the last to fail,
for not only had the big man's face of surprise tickled the crowd, but
the drum had so nicely taken the pitch of his voice that the
interruption seemed even to his friends a joke.

He seized the opportunity, but defiance not complacency was now his
note. "Gentlemen," he said, "it's funny, but you don't drum me down,
let me tell you! You don't drum me down! What I said I'm going to say
again, and shame the devil and the landlords! Free men----"

But he did not say it. Boom, boom, rolled the drum, drowning his voice
beyond hope. And this time, with the fourth stroke, a couple of fifes
struck into a sprightly measure, and the next moment three score
lively voices were roaring:


              You've here the little Peeler,
                Out of place he will not go!
              But to keep it, don't he turn about
                And jump Jim Crow!

              But to keep it see him turn about
                And jump Jim Crow!
              Turn about, and wheel about
                And do just so!

                        _Chorus_

              The only dance Sir Robert knows
                Is Jump Jim Crow!
              The only dance Sir Robert knows
                Is Jump Jim Crow!


For a verse or two the singers had it their own way. Then the band of
the meeting struck in with "See, the Conquering Hero Comes!" and as
the airs clashed in discord, the stalwarts of the two parties clashed
also in furious struggle. In a twinkling and as by magic the scene
changed. Women, children, lads, fled every way, screaming and falling.
Shrieks of alarm routed laughter. The crowd swayed stormily, flowed
this way, ebbed that way. The clatter of staves on clubs rang above
oaths and shouts of defiance, as the Yellows made a rush for the drum.
Men were down, men were trampled on, men strove to scale the cart,
others strove to descend from it. But to descend from it was to
descend into a mêlée of random fists and falling sticks, and the man
from Manchester bellowed to stand fast; while Hatton shouted to "clear
out these rogues," and Banfield called on his men to charge. Basset
alone stood silent, measuring the conflict with his eyes. With an odd
exultation he felt his spirits rise to meet the need.

He saw quickly that the orange favors were outnumbered, and were
giving way; and almost as quickly that, so far as mischief was meant,
it was aimed at the Manchester man. He was a stranger, he was the
delegate of the League, he was a marked man. Already there were cries
to duck him. Basset tapped Banfield on the shoulder.

"They'll not touch us," he shouted in the man's ear, "but we must get
Brierly away. There's Pritchard's house opposite. We must fight our
way to it. Pass the word!" Then to Brierly, "Mr. Brierly, we must get
you away. There's a gang here means mischief."

"Let them come on!" cried the Manchester man, "I'm not afraid."

"No, but I am," Basset replied. "We're responsible, and we'll not have
you hurt here. Down all!" he cried raising his voice, as he saw the
band whom he had already marked, pressing up to the cart through the
mêlée--they moved with the precision of a disciplined force, and most
of their faces were muffled. "Down all!" he shouted. "Yellows to the
rescue! Down before they upset us!"

The leaders scrambled out of the cart, some panic-stricken, some
enjoying the scuffle. They were only just in time. The Yellows were in
flight, amid yells and laughter, and before the last of the platform
was over the side, the cart was tipped up by a dozen sturdy arms.
Hatton and another were thrown down, but a knot of their men, the last
with fight in them, rallied to the call, plucked the two to their
feet, and, striking out manfully, covered the rear of the retreating
force.

The men with the belcher neckerchiefs pressed on silently, brandishing
their clubs, and twice with cries of "Down him! Down him!" made a rush
for Brierly, striking at him over the shoulders of his companions. But
it was plain that the assailants shrank from coming to blows with the
local magnates; and Basset seeing this handed Brierly over to an older
man, and himself fell back to cover the retreat.


"Fair play, men," he cried, good humoredly. And he laughed in their
faces as he fell back before them. "Fair play! You're too many for us
to-day, but wait till the polling-day!"

They hooted him. "Yah! Yah!" they cried. "You'd ruin the land that
bred you! You didn't ought to be there!" "Give us that fustian rascal!
We'll club him!"

"Who makes cloth o' devil's dust?" yelled another. "Yah! You d--d
cotton-spawn!"

Basset laughed in their faces, but he was not sorry when the friendly
doorway received his party. The country gang, satisfied with their
victory, began to fall back after breaking a dozen panes of glass; and
the panting and discomfited Yellows, thronging the passage and pulling
their coats into shape, were free to exchange condolences or
recriminations as they pleased. More than one had been against the
open-air meeting, and Hatton, a sorry figure, hatless, and with a
sprained knee, was not likely to hear the end of it. Two or three had
black eyes, one had lost two teeth, another his hat, and Brierly his
note-book.

But almost before a word had been exchanged, a man pushed his way
among them. He had slipped into the house by the back way. "For God's
sake, gentlemen," he cried, "get the constable, or there'll be
murder!"

"What is it?" asked a dozen voices.

"They've got Ben Bosham, half a hundred of them! They're away to the
canal with him. They're that mad with him they'll drown him!"

So far Basset had treated the affair as a joke. But Bosham's plight in
the hands of a mob of angry farmers seemed more than a joke. Murder
might really be done. He snatched a thick stick from a corner--he had
been hitherto unarmed--and raised his voice. "Mr. Banfield," he said,
"go to Stubbs and tell him what is doing! He can control them if any
one can. And do some of you, gentlemen, come with me! We must get him
from them."

"But we're not enough," a man protested.

"The man must not be murdered," Basset replied. "Come, gentlemen,
they'll not dare to touch us who know them, and we've the law with us!
Come on!"

"Well done, Squire!" cried Brierly. "You're a man!"


"Ay, but I'm not man enough to take you!" Basset retorted. "You stay
here, please!"




                            CHAPTER XXXIV

                             BY THE CANAL


It was noon on that day, the day of the meeting at Riddsley, and Mary
was sitting in the parlor at the Gatehouse. She was stooping over the
fire with her eyes on the embers. The old hound lay beside her with
his muzzle resting on her shoe, and Mrs. Toft, solidly poised on her
feet, on the farther side of the table, rolled her apron about her
arms and considered the pair.

"It's given us all a rare shock," she said as she marked the girl's
listless pose, "the poor Master's death! That sudden and queer, too! I
don't know that I'm better for it, myself, and Toft goes up and down
like a toad under a harrow, he's that restless! For 'Truria, she's
fairly mazed. Her body's here and her thoughts are lord knows
where. Toft, he seems to think something will come of her and her
reverend----"

"I hope so," Mary said gently.

"But it's beyond me what Toft thinks these days. I asked him
point--blank yesterday, 'Toft,' I says, 'are we going or are we
staying?' And, bless the man, he looks at me as if he'd eat me. 'Take
time and you'll know,' he says. 'But whose is the house?' I asks, 'and
who's to pay us?' 'God knows!' he says, and whiffs out of the room
like one of these lucifers!"

"I think that the house is Mr. Basset's," Mary explained, "for the
rest of the lease; that's about three years."

"But you'll not be staying, begging your pardon, Miss? I suppose
you'll be naming the day soon? The Master's gone and his lordship will
be wanting you somewhere else than here."

"Yes, Mrs. Toft," Mary said quietly. "I suppose so."

Mrs. Toft looked for a blush and saw none, and she drew her
conclusions. She went on another tack. "There's like to be a fine
rumpus in the town to-day," she said comfortably. "The Squire's
brought a foreigner down to trim their nails, and there's to be a
wagon and speaking and such like foolishness at the Maypole. As if all
the speeches of all the fools in Staffordshire would lower the
quartern loaf! Anyway, if what Petch says is true, the farmers are
that mad there's like to be lives lost!"

Mary stooped and carefully put a piece of wood on the fire.

"And, to be sure, they're a rough lot," Mrs. Toft continued, dropping
her apron. "I'm not forgetting what happened to the reverend Colet,
and I wish the young master safe out of it. It's all give and no take
with him, too much for others and too little for himself! I'm thinking
if anybody's hurt he'll be there or thereabouts."

Mary turned. "Is Petch--couldn't Petch go down and----"

"La, Miss," Mrs. Toft answered--the girl's face told her all that she
wished to know--"Petch don't dare, with his lordship on the other
side! But, all said and done, I'll be bound the young master'll come
through. It's a pity, though," she continued thoughtfully, as she
began to dust the sideboard, "as people don't know their own minds.
There's the Squire, now. He's lived quiet and pleasant all these years
and now he must dip his nose into this foolishness, same as if he
dipped it into hot worts when Toft's a-brewing! I don't know what's
come to him. He goes riding up to Blore these winter nights, twenty
miles if it's a furlong, when this house is his! He's more like to
take his death that way, if I'm a judge."

"Is he doing that?" Mary asked in a small voice.

"To be sure," Mrs. Toft returned. "What else! Which reminds me, Miss,
are those papers to go to the bank to-day?"

"I believe so."

"Well, you're looking that peaky, you'd best take a jaunt with them.
Why not? It's a fine day, and if there is a bit of a clash there's
none will hurt you. Do you go, Miss, and get a little color in your
cheeks. At worst, you'll bring back the news and I'm sure we're that
dead-alive and moped a little's a godsend!"

"I think I will go," Mary said.

So when the gig, which was to convey the boxes to the bank, arrived
about three, she mounted beside the driver. Here, were it only for an
hour, was distraction and a postponement of that need to decide, to
choose between two courses, which was crushing her under its weight.

For Mary was very unhappy. That moment which had proved to her that
she did not love the man she was to marry and did love another, had
stamped itself on her memory, never to be wiped from it. In Audley's
company, and for a time after they had parted, the shock had numbed
her mind and dulled her feelings. But once alone and free to think,
she had grasped all that the discovery meant--to her and to him; and
from that moment she had not known an instant of ease.

She saw that she had made a terrible mistake, and one so vital that,
if nothing could be done, it must wreck her happiness and another's
happiness. And what was she to do? What ought she to do? In a moment
of emotion, led astray by that love of love which is natural to women,
and something swayed--so she told herself in scorn--by


                Those glories of our blood and state,


which to women are not shadows, she had made this mistake, and now,
self-tricked, she had only herself to blame if


                     Sceptre and crown
                     Were tumbled down
                   And in the dust were lesser made
                   Than the poor crooked scythe and spade!


But to see her folly did not avail. What was she to do?

Ought she to tell the truth, however painful it might be, to the man
whom she had deceived? Or ought she to go through with it, to do her
duty and save him at least from hurt? Either way, she had wrecked her
own craft, but she might still hope to save his. Or--might she hope?
She was not certain even of this.

What was she to do? Hour after hour she asked herself the question,
sometimes looking through the windows with eyes that saw nothing, at
others pacing her room in a fever of anxiety. What was she to do? She
could not decide. Now she thought one thing, now another. And time was
passing. No wonder that she was glad even of the distraction of this
journey to Riddsley that at another time had been so dull an
adventure! It was, at least, a reprieve, a respite from the burden of
decision.

She would not own, even to herself, that she had any other thought in
going, or that anxiety had any part in her restlessness. From that
side of the battle she turned her eyes with all the strength of her
will. Her conduct had been that of a silly girl rather than that of a
woman who had seen and suffered; but she was not light--and besides
Basset was cured. She was only unfortunate, and desperately unhappy.

As they drove by the old Cross at the foot of the hill she averted her
eyes. Surely it must have been in some other life that she had made it
the object of a walk, and had told herself that she would never forget
it.

Alas, she had been right. She would never forget it!

The man who drove saw that her face matched her mourning, and he left
her to her thoughts, so that hardly a word passed between them until
they were close upon the outskirts of the town. Then the driver, to
whom the dull winter landscape, the lines of willows, and the low
water-logged fields, were no novelty, pricked up his ears.

"Dang me!" he said, "they've started! There's a fine rumpus in the
town. Do you hear 'em, Miss? That's a band I'm thinking?"

"I hope no one will be hurt."

The man winked at his horse. "None of the right side, Miss," he said
slyly. "But it might be a hanging, front o' Stafford gaol, by the
roar! I met a tidy lot going in as I came out, a right tidy lot! I'm
blest," after listening a moment, "if they're not coming this way!"

"I hope they won't do anything to----"

"La, Miss," the man answered, misreading her anxiety and interrupting
her, "they'll never touch us. And for the old nag, he's yeomanry. He'd
not start if he met a mile o' funerals!"

Certainly the noise was growing. But the lift of the canal bridge and
bank, which crossed the road a hundred yards before them, hid all of
the town from them save a couple of church towers, some tiled roofs,
and the brick gable of Hatton's Works. The man whipped up his horse.

"Teach they Manchester chaps a trick!" he muttered. "Shouldn't wonder
if there'll be work for the crowner out of this! Gee-up, old nag,
let's see what's afoot! 'Pears to me," as the shouting grew plainer,
"we'll be in at the death yet, Miss!"

Mary winced at the word, but if the man feared that she would refuse
to go on, he was mistaken. On the contrary, she looked eagerly to
the front as the old horse, urged by the whip, took the rise of the
bridge at a canter, and, having reached the crown, relapsed into an
absent-minded walk.

"Dang me!" cried the driver, greatly excited, "but they do mean
business! It's in knee in neck with 'em! Never thought it would come
to this. And who is't they've got, Miss?"

Certainly there was something out of the common on foot. Moving to
meet the gig, and filling the road from ditch to ditch, appeared a
disorderly crowd of two or three hundred persons. Cheering, hooting,
and brandishing sticks, they came on at something between a walk and a
run, although in the heart of the mass there was a something that now
and again checked the movement, and once brought it to a stand. When
this happened the crowd eddied and flowed about the object in its
centre and presently swept on again with the same hooting and
laughter.

But in the laughter, as in the hooting, there was, after each of these
pauses, a more savage note.

"What is it?" Mary cried, as the driver, scared by the sight, pulled
up his horse. "What is it?"

"D--n me," the man replied, forgetting his manners, "if I don't think
it's Ben Bosham they've got! It is Ben! And they're for ducking him!
It's mortal deep by the bridge there, and s'help me, if it's not ten
to one they drown him!"

"Ben Bosham?" Mary repeated. Then she recalled the name. She
remembered what Mrs. Toft had said of him--that the man had a wife
and would bring her to ruin. The crowd was not fifty yards from them
now and was still coming on. To the left a track ran down to the
towing-path and the canal, and already the leaders of the mob were
swerving in that direction. As they did so--and were once more checked
for a moment--Mary espied among them a man's bald head twisting this
way and that, as he strove to escape. The man was struggling
desperately, his clothes almost torn from his back, but he was
helpless in the hands of a knot of stout fellows, and after a brief
resistance he was hauled forcibly on. A hundred jeering voices rose
about him, and a something cruel in the sound chilled Mary's blood.
The dreary scene, the sluggish canal, the flat meadows, the rising
mist, all pressed on her mind and deepened the note of tragedy.

But on that she broke the spell. The blood in her spoke. She clutched
the driver's arm and shook it. "Go on!" she cried. "Go on! Drive into
them!"

The man hesitated--he saw that the crowd was in no jesting mood. But
the old horse felt the twitch on the reins and started, and having the
slope with him, trotted gently forward as if the road were empty
before him. The crowd waved and shouted, and cursed the driver. But
the horse, thinking perhaps that this was some new form of parade,
only cocked his ears and ambled on till he reached the foremost. Then
a man seized the rein, jerked it, and stopped him.

In a moment Mary sprang down, heedless of the fact that she was one
woman among a hundred men. She faced the crowd, her eyes bright with
indignation. "Let that man go," she cried. "Do you hear? Do you want
to murder him?" And, advancing a step, she laid her hand on Ben
Bosham's ragged, filthy sleeve--he had been down more than once and
been rolled in the mud. "Let him go!" she continued imperiously. "Do
you know who I am, you cowards? Let him go!"

"Yah!" shouted the crowd, and drowned her voice and pressed roughly
about her, threatened her. One of the foremost asked her what she
would do, another cried that she had best make herself scarce! Furious
faces surrounded her, fists were shaken at her. But Mary was not
daunted. "If you don't let him go, I shall go to Lord Audley!" she
said.

"You're a fool meddling in this!" cried a voice. "We're only going to
wash the devil!"

"You will let him go!" she replied, facing them all without fear and,
advancing a step, she actually plucked the man from the hands that
held him. "I am Miss Audley! If you do not let him go----"

"We're only going to wash him, lady," whined one of the men who held
him.

"That's all, lady!" chimed in half-a-dozen. "He wants it!"

But Ben was not of that opinion, or he did not value cleanliness.
"They're going to drown me!" he spluttered, his eyes wild. All the
fight had been knocked out of him. "They're paid to do it! They'll
drown me!"

"And sarve him right!" shouted half-a-dozen at the rear of the crowd.
"Sarve him right, the devil!"

"They will not do it!" Mary said firmly. "They'll not lay another hand
on you. Get in! Get in here!" And then to the crowd, "For shame!" she
cried. "Stand back!"

The man was so shaken that he could not help himself, but she pushed,
the driver pulled, and in a trice, before the mob had recovered from
its astonishment, Ben was above their heads, on the seat of the gig--a
blubbering, ragged, mud-caked figure with a white face and bleeding
lips. "Go on!" Mary said in the same tone, and the gig moved forward,
the old yeomanry horse tossing its head. She moved on beside it with
her hand on the rail.

The mob let them pass, but closed in behind them, and after a pause
began to jeer--a little in amusement, a little to cover its defeat. In
a moment farce took the place of tragedy; the danger was over. "We'll
tell your wife, Ben!" screamed a youth, and the crowd laughed and
followed. Other wits took their turn. "You'll want a new coat for the
wedding, Ben!" cried one. And now and again amid the laughter a
sterner note survived. "We'll ha' you yet, Ben!" a man would cry.
"You're not out of the wood yet, Ben!"

Mary's face burned, but she stuck to her post, plodding on beside the
gig, and after this fashion the queer procession, heralded by a score
of urchins crying the news, entered the streets of the town. On either
side women thronged the doorways and steps, and while some cried,
"Bravo, Miss!" others laughed and called to their neighbors to come
out and see the sight. And still the crowd clung to the rear of the
gig, and hooted and laughed and pretended to make forays on it.

Mary had hoped to shake them off, but as they persisted in following
and no relief came--for Basset and his rescue party had gone to the
canal by another road--she saw nothing for it but to go on to Lord
Audley's. With a curt word she made the man turn that way.

The crowd still attended, curious, amused. It had doubled its numbers,
nay, had trebled them. There were friends as well as foes among them
now, some of Hatton's men, some of Banfield's, yellow favors as well
as blue. If Mary had known it, she might have set Ben down and not a
hand would have been laid upon him. Even the leaders of the riot were
now thankful that they had not carried the matter farther. Enough had
been done.

But Mary did not know this. She thought that the man was still in
peril. She did not dream of leaving him. And it was at the head of a
crowd of three or four hundred of the riff-raff of Riddsley that she
broke in upon the quiet of the suburban road in which The Butterflies
stood. Tumultuously, followed by laughter and hooting and cheers, she
swept along it with her train, and came to a halt before the house.

No house was ever more surprised. Mrs. Wilkinson's scared face peered
above one blind, her sisters' caps showed above another. Was it an
accident? Was it a riot? Was it a Puseyite protest? What was it? Every
servant, every neighbor, Lord Audley himself came to the windows.

Mary signed to the driver to help Ben down, and the moment the man's
foot touched the ground she grasped his arm. With a burning face, but
with her head in the air, she guided his stumbling footsteps through
the gate and along the paved walk. They came together to the door.
They went in.

The crowd formed up five deep along the railings, and waited in
wondering silence to see what would happen. What would his lordship
say? What would his lordship do? This was bringing the election to his
doors with a vengeance, and there were not a few of the better sort
who saw the fun of the situation.




                             CHAPTER XXXV

                          MY LORD SPEAKS OUT


Mary had passed through twenty minutes of tense excitement. The risk
had been slight, after the first moment of intervention, but she had
not known this, and she was still trembling with indignation, a
creature all fire and passion, when the door of The Butterflies opened
to admit her. Leaving Ben Bosham on the threshold she lost not a
moment, but with her story on her lips, hurried up the stairs, and on
the landing came plump upon Lord Audley.

From the window he had seen something of what was afoot below. He had
recognized Mary and the tattered Bosham, and he had read the riddle,
grasped the facts, and cursed the busybody, all within thirty seconds.
"D--n it! this passes everything," he had muttered to himself as he
turned from the window in disgust. "This is altogether too much!" And
he had opened the door--ready also to open his mind to her!

"What in the world is it?" he asked. He held the door for her to
enter. "What has happened? I could not believe my eyes when I saw you
in company with that wretched creature!" he continued. "And all the
tagrag and bobtail in the place behind you? What is it, Mary?"

She felt the check, and the color, which excitement had brought to her
cheeks, faded. But she thought that it was only that he did not
understand, and, "That wretched creature, as you call him," she cried,
"has just escaped from death. They were going to murder him!"

"Murder him?" Audley repeated. He raised his eyebrows. "Murder him?"
coldly. "My dear girl, don't be silly! Don't let yourself be carried
away. You've lost your head. And, pardon me for saying it, I am afraid
have made a fool of yourself! And of me!"

"But they were going to throw him into the canal!" she protested.

"Going to wash him!" he replied cynically. "And a good thing too! It's
a pity they left the job undone. The man is a low, pestilent fellow!"
he continued severely, "and obnoxious to me and to all decent people.
The idea of bringing him, and that pleasant tail, to my house--my dear
girl, it's absurd!"

He made no attempt to soften his tone or suppress his annoyance, and
she stared at him in astonishment. Yet she still thought, or she
strove to think, that he did not understand, and tried to make the
facts clear. "But you don't know what they were like," she protested.
"You were not there. They had torn the clothes from his back----"

"I can see that."

"And he was so terrified that it was dreadful to see him! They were
handling him brutally, horribly! And then I came up and----"

"And lost your head!" he said. "I dare say you thought all this. But
do you know anything about elections?"

"No----"

"Have you ever see an election in progress before?"

"No."

"Just so," he replied dryly. "Well, if you had, you would know that
brawls of this kind are common things, the commonest of things at such
a time, and that sensible people turn their backs on them. You've
chosen to turn the farce into a tragedy, and in doing so you've made
yourself ridiculous--and me too!"

"If you had seen them," she said, "I do not think you would speak as
you are speaking."

"My dear girl," he replied, and shrugged his shoulders, "I have seen
many such things, many. But there is one thing I have never seen, and
that is a man killed in an election squabble! The whole thing is
childish--silly! The least knowledge of the world--"

"Would have saved me from it?"

"Exactly! Would have saved you from it!" he answered austerely. "And
me from a very annoying incident! Peers have nothing to do with
elections, as you ought to know; and to bring this mob of all sorts to
my door as if the matter touched me, is to compromise me. It is past a
joke!"

Mary stared. She was trying to place herself. Certainly this was the
room in which she had taken tea, and this was the man who had welcomed
her, who had hung over her, whose eyes had paid her homage, who had
foreseen her least want, who had lapped her in observance. This was
the man and this the room, and there was the chair in which good Mrs.
Wilkinson had sat and beamed on her.

But there was a change somewhere; and the change was in the man. Could
it mean that he, too, had made a mistake and now recognized it? That
he, too, had found that he did not love? But in that case this was not
the way to confess an error. His tone, his manner, which held no
respect for the woman and no softness for the sweetheart, were far
from the tone of one in the wrong. On the contrary, they presented a
side of him which had been hitherto hidden from her; a phase of the
strength that she had admired, which shocked her even while, as deep
calls to deep, it roused her pride. She remembered that she was his
betrothed, and that he had wooed her, he had chosen her. And on slight
provocation he spoke to her in this strain!

She sought the clue, she fancied that she held it, and from this
moment she was on her guard. She was quiet, but there was a
smouldering fire in her eyes. "Perhaps I was wrong," she said. "I have
had little experience of these things. But are not you, on your side,
making too much of this? Too much of a very small, a very natural
mistake? Isn't it a trifle after all?"

"Not so much of a trifle as you think!" he retorted. "A man in my
position has to follow a certain line of conduct. A girl in yours
should be careful to guide herself by my views. Instead, out of a
foolish sentimentality, you run directly counter to them! It is too
late to consider your relation to me when the harm is done, my dear."

"Perhaps we have neither of us considered the relation quite enough?"
she said.

"I am not sure that we have." And again, "I am not sure, Mary, that we
have," he repeated more soberly.

She knew what he meant now--knew what was in his mind almost as
clearly as if, instead of grasping his conclusion, she had been a
party to his reasons. And she closed her lips, a spot of color in each
cheek. In other circumstances she would have taken on herself a full,
nay, the main share, of the blame. She would have been quick to admit
that she, too, had made a mistake, and that no harm was done.

But his manner opened her eyes to many things that had been a puzzle
to her. Thought is swift, and in a flash her mind had travelled over
the whole course of their engagement, had recalled his long absence,
the chill of his letters, the infrequency of his visits; and she saw
by that light that this was no sudden shift, but an occasion sought
and seized. Therefore she would not help him. She at least had been
honest, she at least had been in earnest. She had tricked, not him
only, but herself!

She closed her lips and waited, therefore. And he, knowing that he had
now burned his boats, had to go on. "I am not sure that we did think
enough about it?" he said doggedly. "I have suspected for some time
that I acted hastily in--in asking you to be my wife, Mary."

"Indeed?" she said.

"Yes. And what has happened to-day, proving that we look at things
so differently, has confirmed my suspicion. It has convinced me--"
he looked down at his table, avoiding her eyes, but continued
firmly--"that we are not suited to one another. The wife of a man,
placed as I am, should have an idea of values, a certain reserve, that
comes of a knowledge of the world; above all, no sentimental notions
such as lead to mistakes like this." He indicated the street by a
gesture. "If I was mistaken a while ago in listening to my feelings
rather than to my prudence, if I gave you credit for knowledge which
you had had no means of gaining, I wronged you, Mary, and I am sorry
for it. But I should be doing you a far greater wrong if I remained
silent now."

"Do you mean," she asked in a low voice, "that you wish it to be at an
end between us? That you wish to--to throw me over?"

He smiled awry. "That is an unpleasant way of putting it, isn't it?"
he said. "However, I am in the wrong, and I have no right to quarrel
with a word. I do think that to break off our engagement at once is
the best and wisest thing for both of us."

"How long have you felt this?" she asked.

"For some time," he replied, measuring his words, "I have been coming
slowly--to that conclusion."

"That I am not fitted to be your wife?"

"If you like to put it so."

Then her anger, hitherto kept under, flamed up. "Then what right," she
cried, "if that was in your mind, had you to treat me as you treated
me at Beaudelays--in the garden? What right had you to kiss me?
Rather, what right had you to insult me? For it was an insult--it was
an insult, if you were not going to marry me! Don't you know, sir,
that it was vile? That it was unforgivable?"

She had never looked more handsome, never more attractive than at this
moment. The day was failing, but the glow of the fire fell on her
face, and on her eyes sparkling with anger. He took in the picture, he
owned her charm, he even came near to repenting. But it was too late,
and "It may have been vile--and you may not forgive it," he answered
hardily, "but I'd do it again, my dear, on the same provocation!"

"You would----"

"I would do it again," he repeated coolly. "Don't you know that you
are handsome enough to turn any man's head? And what is a kiss after
all? We are cousins. If you were not such a prude, I would kiss you
now?"

She was furiously angry--or she fancied that she was. But it may be
that, deep down in her woman's mind, she was not truly angry. And,
indeed, how could she be angry when in her heart a little bird was
beginning to sing--was telling her that she was free, that presently
this cloud would be behind her, and that the sky would be blue?
Already the message was making itself heard, already she was finding
it hard to keep up appearances, to frown upon him and play her part.

Yet she flashed out at him. Was he not going too fast, was he not
riding off too lightly? "Oh!" she cried, "You dare to say that! Even
while you break off with me!"

But his selfish, masterful nature had now the upper hand. He had eaten
his leek and he was anxious to be done with it. "And what then?" he
said. "I believe that you know that I am right. I believe that you
know that we are not suited to one another."

"And you think I will let you go at a word?"

"I think you will let me go," he said, "because you are not a fool,
Mary. You know as well as I do that you might be 'my lady' at too high
a price. I'm not the most manageable of men. I'd make a decent
husband, all being well. But I'm not meek and I'd make a very unhandy
husband _malgré moi_."

The threat exasperated her. "I know this at least," she retorted,
"that I would not marry you now, if you were twenty times my lord! You
have behaved meanly, and I believe falsely! Not to-day! You are
speaking the truth to-day. But I believe that from the start you had
this in your mind, that you foresaw this, and were careful not to
commit yourself too publicly! What I don't understand is why you ever
asked me to be your wife--at all?"

"Look in the glass!" he answered impudently.

She put that aside. "But I suppose that you had a reason!" she
returned. "That you loved me, that you felt for me anything worthy of
the name of love is impossible! For the rest, let me tell you this! If
I ever felt thankful for anything I am thankful for the chance that
brought me to your house to-day--and brought me to the truth!"

"Anything more to say?" he asked flippantly. The way she was taking it
suited him better than if she had wept and appealed. And then she was
so confoundedly good-looking in her tantrums!

"Nothing more," she said. "I think that we understand one another now.
At any rate, I understand you. Perhaps you will kindly see if I can
leave the house without annoyance."

He looked into the street. Dusk had fallen, the lamplighter was going
his rounds. Of the crowd that had attended Mary to the house no more
than a handful remained; the nipping air, the attractions of free
beer, the sound of the muffin-bell, had drawn away the rest. The
driver of the gig was moving to and fro, now looking disconsolately at
the windows, now beating his fingers on his chest.

"I think you can leave with safety," Audley said with irony. "I will
see you downstairs."

"I will not trouble you," she answered.

"But, surely, we may still be friends?"

She looked him in the face. "We need not be enemies," she answered.
"And, perhaps, some day I may be able to think more kindly of you. If
that day comes I will tell you. Good-bye." She went out without
touching his hand. She went down the stairs.

She drove through the dusky, dimly-lighted streets in a kind of dream,
seeing all things through a pleasant haze. The bank was closed and to
deliver up her papers she had to go into the bank-house. The glimpse
she had of the cheerful parlor, of the manager's wife, of his two
children playing the Royal Game of Goose at a round table, enchanted
her. Presently she was driving again through the darkling streets,
passing the Maypole, passing the quaint, low-browed shops, lit only by
an oil lamp or a couple of candles. The Audley Arms, the Packhorse,
the Portcullis, were all alight and buzzing with the voices of those
who fought their battles over again or laid bets on this candidate or
that. What the speaker had said to Lawyer Stubbs and what Lawyer
Stubbs had said to the speaker, what the "Duke" thought, who would
have to pay for the damage, and the odds the stout farmer would give
that wheat wouldn't be forty shillings a quarter this day twelvemonth
if the Repeal passed--scraps of these and the like poured from the
doorways as she drove by.

All fell in delightfully with her mood and filled her with a sense of
well-being. Even when the streets lay behind her, and the driver
hunched his shoulders to meet the damp night-fog and the dreary
stretch that lay beyond the canal-bridge, Mary found the darkness
pleasant and the chill no more than bracing. For what were that night,
that chill beside the numbing grip from which she had just--oh, thing
miraculous!--escaped! Beside the fetters that had been lifted from her
within the last hour! O foolish girl, O ineffable idiot, to have ever
fancied that she loved that man!

No, for her it was a charming night! The owl that, far away towards
the Great House, hooted dolefully above the woods--no nightingale
had been more tuneful. Ben Bosham--she laughed, thinking of his
plight--blessings on his bare, bald head and his ragged shoulders! The
old horse plodding on, with the hill that mounts to the Gatehouse
sadly on his mind--he should have oats, if oats there were in the
Gatehouse stables! He should have oats in plenty, or what he would if
oats failed!

"What do you give him when he's tired?" she asked.

"Well," the driver replied with diplomacy, "times a quart of ale,
Miss. He'll take it like a Christian."

"Then a quart of ale he shall have to-night!" she said with a happy
laugh. "And you shall have one, too, Simonds."

Her mood held to the end, so that before she was out of her wraps,
Mrs. Toft was aware of the change in her. "Why, Miss," she said, "you
look like another creature! It isn't the bank, I'll be bound, has put
that color in your cheeks!"

"No!" Mary answered, "I've had an adventure, Mrs. Toft. And briefly
she told the tale of Ben Bosham's plight and of her gallant rescue.
She began herself to see the comic side of it.

"He always was a fool, was Ben!" Mrs. Toft commented. "And that," she
continued shrewdly, "was how you come to see his lordship was it,
Miss?"

"How did you know I saw him?" Mary asked in surprise. "But you're
right, I did." Then, as she entered the parlor, "Perhaps I'd better
tell you, Mrs. Toft," she said, "that the engagement between my cousin
and myself is at an end. You were one of the very few who knew of it,
and so I tell you."

Mrs. Toft showed no surprise. "Indeed, Miss," she answered, stooping
to the hearth to light the candles with a piece of wood. "Well, one
thing's certain, and many a time my mother's drummed it into me,
'Better a plain shoe than one that pinches!' And again, 'Better live
at the bottom of the hill than the top,' she'd say. 'You see less but
you believe more.'"

Neither she nor Mary saw Toft. But Toft, who had entered the hall a
moment before, was within hearing, and Mary's statement, so coolly
received by his wife, had an extraordinary effect on the man-servant.
He stood an instant, his lank figure motionless. Then he opened the
door beside him, slipped out into the chill and the darkness, and
silently, but with extravagant gestures, he broke into a dance, now
waving his thin arms in the air, now stooping with his hands locked
between his knees. Whether he thus found vent for joy or grief was a
secret which he kept to himself.




                            CHAPTER XXXVI

                        THE RIDDSLEY ELECTION


The riot at Riddsley found its way into the London Press, and gained
for the contest a certain amount of notoriety. The _Morning Chronicle_
pointed out that the election had been provoked by the Protectionists
in a constituency in Sir Robert's own country; and the writer inferred
that, foreseeing defeat, the party of the land were now resorting to
violence. The _Morning Herald_ rejoiced that there were still places
which would not put up with the incursions of the Manchester League,
"the most knavish, pestilent body of men that ever plagued this or any
country!" In the House, where the tempest of the Repeal debate already
raged, and the air was charged with the stern invective of Disraeli,
or pulsed to the cheering of Peel's supporters--even here men
discussed the election at Riddsley, considered it a clue to the
feeling in the country, and on the one side hardly dared to hope, on
the other refused to fear. What? cried the Land Party. Be defeated in
an agricultural borough? Never!

For a brief time, then, the contest filled the public eye and
presented itself as a thing of more than common interest. Those who
knew little weighed the names and the past of the candidates; those
behind the scenes whispered of Lord Audley. Whips gave thought to him,
and that one to whom his lordship was pledged, wrote graciously,
hinting at the pleasant things that might happen if all went well, and
the present winter turned to a summer of fruition.

Alas, Audley felt that the Whip's summer, and


              The friendly beckon towards Downing Street,
              Which a Premier gives to one who wishes
              To taste of the Treasury loaves and fishes,


were very remote, whereas, if the other Whip, he who had the honors
under his hand and the places in his power, had written so! But that
cursed Stubbs had blocked his play in that direction by asserting that
it was hopeless, though Audley himself began at this late hour to
suspect that it had not been hopeless! That it had been far from
hopeless!

In his chagrin my lord tore the Whip's letter across and across, and
then prudently gummed it together again and locked it away. Certainly
the odds were long that it would never be honored; on the one side
stood Peel with four-fifths of his Cabinet and half his party, with
all the Whigs, all the Radicals, all the League, and the Big Loaf: on
the other stood the landed interest! Just the landed interest led by
Lord George Bentinck, handsome and debonair, the darling of the Turf,
the owner of Crucifix; but hitherto a silent member, and one at whom,
as a leader, the world gaped. Only, behind this Joseph there lurked a
Benjamin, one whose barbed shafts were many a time to clear the field.
The lists were open, the lances were levelled, the slogan of Free
Trade was met by the cry of "The Land and the Constitution!" and while
old friendships were torn asunder and old allies cut adrift, town and
country, forge and field, met in a furious grapple that promised to be
final.

If, amid the dust of such a conflict, the riot at Riddsley obtained a
passing notice in London, intense it may be believed was the
excitement which it caused in the borough. Hatton and Banfield and
their men went about, vowing to take vengeance at the hustings. The
mayor went about, swearing in constables. The farmers and their allies
went about grinning. Fights took place nightly behind the Packhorse
and the Portcullis, while very old ladies, peering over their blinds,
talked of the French Revolution, and very young ones thought that the
Militia, adequately officered, should be brought into the town.

The spirit of which Basset had given proof was blazoned about; and he
gained in another way. He was one of those to whom a spice of danger
is a fillip, whom a little peril shakes out of themselves. On the day
after the riot he came upon a score of people collected round a Cheap
Jack in the market. The man presently closed his patter and his stall,
and, on the impulse of the moment, Basset took his place and made the
crowd a speech as short as it was simple. He told them that in his
opinion it was impossible to keep food out of the country by a tax
while Ireland was threatened by famine. Secondly, that the sacrifice
which Peel was making of his party, his reputation, and his
consistency was warrant that in his view the change was urgently
needed. Thirdly, he asked them whether the farmers were so prosperous
and the laborers so comfortable that change must be for the worse. But
here he came on delicate ground; murmurs arose and some hisses, and he
broke off good-humoredly, thanked the crowd, which had grown to a good
size, and, stepping down from his barrow, he walked away amid
plaudits. The thing was reported, and though the Tories sneered at it
as a hole-and-corner meeting, Farthingale held another view. He told
Mr. Stubbs that it was a neat thing--very well done.

Stubbs grunted. "Will it change a vote?" he growled.

"Change a----"

"Will it change a vote, man? You heard what I said."

"Lord, no!" the clerk answered. "I never said it would!"

"Then why trouble about it?" Stubbs retorted fretfully. "Get on with
those poll-cards! I don't pay you a guinea a day at election time to
praise monkey-tricks."

For Stubbs was not happy. He knew, indeed, that the breaking-up of the
open-air meeting had been fairly successful. It had brought back two
votes to the fold; and he calculated that the seat would be held. But
by a majority how narrow, how fallen, how discreditable! He blushed to
think of it.

And other things made him unhappy. Those who are politicians by trade
are like cardplayers, who play for the game's sake; one game lost,
they cut and deal as keenly as before. Behind the politicians,
however, are a few to whom the stake is something; and of these was
Stubbs. To him, as we know, the Corn-Tax was no mere toll, but the
protection of agriculture, the well-head that guarded the pure waters,
the fence that saved from smoke and steam, from slag-heap and
brickfield, the smiling face of England. For him, the home of his
fathers, the land of field and stubble, of plough and pinfold, was at
stake; nay, was passing, wasted by men who thought in percentages and
saw no farther than the columns of their ledgers. To that England of
his memory--whether it had ever existed in fact or no--a hundred
associations bound the lawyer; things tender and things true; quaint
memories of his first turkey's nest, of the last load of the harvest,
of the loosened plough horses straying to the water at the close of
day, of the flat paintings of the Durham Ox and the Coke Ram that
adorned the farm parlor.

To the men who bade him look up and see that in his Elysium the farmer
struggled and the laborer starved, his answer was short. "Better ten
shillings and fresh air, than shoddy dust and a pound a week!"

In the country as a whole--and as time went on--he despaired of
success. But he found Lord George a leader after his own heart, and
many an evening he pored over the long paragraphs of his long-winded
speeches. When he heard that the owner of Crucifix had dismissed his
trainers, released his jockeys, sold his stud, and turned his back on
the turf, he could have wept. Lord George and Stubbs, indeed, were the
true country party. For Lord George's sake Stubbs was prepared to
taken even the "Jew boy" to his heart.

As to the potato famine, he did not believe a word of it. He called
the Premier, "Potato Peel!"

The rains of February are apt to damp enthusiasm, but before eleven
o'clock on the nomination day Riddsley was like a hive of bees about
to swarm. The throng in the streets was such that Mottisfont could
hardly pass through it. He made his entry into the borough on
horseback at the head of a hundred mounted farmers wearing blue sashes
and favors. Before him reeled a huge banner upheld by eight men and
bearing on one side the legend, "The Land and the Constitution," on
the other, "Mottisfont the Farmers' Friend!" Behind the horsemen, and
surrounded by a guard of laborers in smocked frocks, moved a plough
mounted on a wain and drawn by eight farm horses. Flags with "Speed
the Plough," "England's Share is England's Fare," and "Peace and
Plenty," streamed from it. Three bands of varying degrees of badness
found their places where they could, and thumped and blared against
one another until the panes rattled in the deafened streets. The
butchers, with marrow-bones and cleavers, brought up the rear, and in
comparison were tuneful.

Had Basset got his way, he would have dispensed with pomp and walked
the hundred yards which separated his quarters at the Swan from the
hustings. But he was told that this would never do. What would the
landlord of the Swan say, who kept postchaises? And the postboys who
looked for a golden tip? And the men who would hand him in and hand
him out, and the men who would open the door and shut the door, and
the men who would raise the steps and lower the steps, who would all
look for the same tip? So, perforce, he drove in state to the Town
Hall--before which the hustings stood--in a barouche and four
accompanied by Banfield and Hatton and his agent. The rest of his
Committee followed in postchaises. A bodyguard of "hands" escorted
them, and they, too, had their bands--of equal badness--and their
yellow banners with "Down with the Corn Laws," "Vote for Basset the
Poor Man's Friend," and "No Bread Taxes." The great and little loaf
pranced in front of him on spears, and if his procession was not quite
so fine or so large as his opponent's, it must be admitted that the
blackguards of the town showed no preference and that he could boast
about an equal number of the tagrag and bobtail.

The left hand of the hustings was allotted to him, the right hand to
Mottisfont, and by a little after eleven both parties had crammed and
crushed,


              With blustering, bullying, and brow-beating,
              A little pummelling and maltreating,
              And elbowing, jostling and cajoling,


into their places in front of the platform, the bullies and
truncheon-men being posted well to the fore, or craftily ranged where
the frontiers met. The bands boomed and blared, the men huzzaed, the
air shook, the banners waved, every window that looked out upon the
seething mob was white with faces, every 'vantage-point was occupied.
It was such a day and such a contest as Riddsley had never seen. The
eyes of the country, it was felt, were upon it! Fights took place
every five minutes, oaths and bets flew like hail over the heads of
the crowd, coarse wit met coarser nicknames, and now and again shrieks
varied the hubbub as the huge press of people, gathered from miles
round, swayed under the impact of some vicious rush.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Mottisfont for ever! Basset! Basset and the Big Loaf!
Basset! Basset! Hurrah! Mottisfont! Hurrah!"

Then, in a short-lived silence, "Ten to one on Mottisfont! Three
cheers for the Duke!" and a roar of laughter.

Or a hundred voices would raise


              John Barley-corn, my Joe, John!
              When we were first acquaint!


but never got beyond the first two lines, either because they were
howled down or they knew no more of the words. The Peelites answered
with their mournful,


              Child, is thy father dead?
                Father is gone!
              Why did they tax his bread?
                God's will be done!


or with the quicker,


              Oh, landlords' devil take
                Thy own elect I pray!
              Who taxed our cake, and took our cake,
                And threw our cake away!


On this would ensue a volley of personalities. "What would you be
without your starch, Hayward?" "How's your dad, Farthingale?" "Who
whopped his wife last Saturday?" "Hurrah! Hurrah! Who said Potatoes?"

For nearly an hour this went on, the blare of the bands, the uproar,
the cheering, the abuse never ceasing. Then the town-crier appeared
upon the vacant hustings. He rang his bell for silence and for a
moment obtained it. On his heels entered, first the mayor and his
assistants, then the candidates, the proposers, the seconders. Each,
as he made his appearance, was greeted with a storm of groans, cheers,
and cat-calls. Each put on to meet it such a show of ease as he could,
some smiling, some affecting ignorance. The candidates and their
supporters filed to either side, while the flustered mayor took his
stand in the middle with the town clerk at his elbow.

Basset, nearly at the end of his troubles, sought comfort in looking
beyond the present moment. He feared that he was not likely to win,
but he had done his duty, he had made his effort, and soon he would be
free to repeat that effort on a smaller stage. Soon, these days, that
in horror rivalled the middle passage of the slave trade, would be
over, and if he were not elected he would be free to retire to Blore,
and to spend days, lonely and sad indeed, but clean, in the
improvement of his acres and his people. His eyes dwelt upon the sea
of faces, and from time to time he smiled; but his mind was far away.
He thought with horror of elections, and with loathing of the sordid
round of flattery and handshaking, of bribery and intimidation from
which he emerged. Thank God, the morrow would see the end! He would
have done his best, and played his part. And it would be over.

What the mayor said and what the town clerk said is of no importance,
for no one heard them. The proposers, the seconders, the candidates,
all spoke in dumb show. Basset dwelt briefly on the crisis in Ireland,
the integrity of Peel, and the doubtful wisdom of taxing that which,
to the poorest, was a necessity of life. If bread were cheaper all
would have more to spend on other things and the farmer would have a
wider market for his meat, his wool, and his cheese. It read well in
the local paper.

But one man was heard. This was a man who was not expected to speak,
whose creed it had ever been that speeches were useless, and whom
tradition almost forbade to speak, for he was an agent. At the last
moment, when a seconder for a formal motion was needed, he thrust
himself forward to the astonishment of all. The same astonishment
stilled the mob as they gazed on the well-known figure. For a minute
or two, curiosity and the purpose in the man's face, held even his
opponents silent.

The man was Stubbs; and from the moment he showed himself it was plain
that he was acting under the stress of great emotion. The very
fuglemen forgot to interrupt him. They scented something out of the
common.

"I have never spoken on the hustings in my life," he said. "I speak
now to warn you. I believe that you, the electors of Riddsley, are
going to sell the birthright of health which you have received; and
the heritage of freedom which this land has enjoyed for generations
and on which the power of Bonaparte broke as on a rock. You think you
are going to have cheap bread, and, maybe, you are! But at what a
cost! Cheap bread is foreign bread. To you, the laborers, I say that
foreign bread means that the fields you till will be laid to grass and
you will go to work in Dudley and Walsall and Bury and Bolton, in
mills and pits and smoke and dust! And your children will be dwarfed
and wizened and puny! Foreign bread means that. And it means that the
day will come when war will cut off your bread and you will starve; or
the will of the foreigner who feeds you will cut it off--for he will
be your master. I say, grow your own bread and eat your own bread, and
you will be free men. Eat foreign bread and in time you will be
slaves! No land that is fed by another land----"

His last words were lost. Signals from furious principals roused the
fuglemen, and he was howled down, and stood back ashamed of the
impulse which had moved him and little less astonished than those
about him. Young Mottisfont clapped him on the back and affected to
make much of him. But even he hardly knew how to take it. Some said
that Stubbs had had tears in his eyes, while the opposing agent
whispered to his neighbor that the lawyer was breaking and would never
handle another contest. Sober men shook their heads; agents should
hardly be seen, much less heard!

But Stubbs's words were marked, and when the bad times came thirty
years later, aged farmers recalled them and thought over them. Nor
were they without fruit at the time. For next morning when the poll
opened, Basset's people suffered a shock. Two men on whom he had
counted appeared and voted short and sharp for Mottisfont. Basset's
agent asked them pleasantly if they were not making a mistake; and
then less pleasantly had the Bribery Oath administered to them. But
they stuck to their guns, the votes were recorded, and Mottisfont
shook hands with them. Later in the day when the two were fuddled they
denied that they had voted for Mottisfont. They had voted for old
Stubbs--and they would do it again and fight any man who said to the
contrary. Their desire in this direction was quickly met, and both, to
the indignation of the Tories, were fined five shillings at the next
petty sessions.

Whether this start gave the Protectionists a fillip or no, they were
in great spirits, and Mottisfont was up and down shaking hands all the
morning. At noon the figures as exhibited outside the Mottisfont
Committee-room--amid tremendous cheering--were:


                     Mottisfont . . . 41
                     Basset . . . . . 30


though Basset outside his Committee-room claimed one more. Soon after
twelve Hatton brought up the two Boshams in his carriage, and Ben,
recovered from his fright, flung his hat before him into the booth,
danced a war-dance on the steps, and gave three cheers for Basset as
he came down. Banfield brought up three more voters in his carriage
and thence onward until one o'clock the polling was rapid. The one
o'clock board showed:


                     Mottisfont . . . 60
                     Basset . . . . . 57


with seventy votes to poll. The Mottisfont party began to look almost
as blue as their favors, but Stubbs, returned to his senses, continued
to read his newspaper in a closet behind the Committee-room, as if
there were no contest within a hundred miles of Riddsley.

During the next three hours little was done. The poll-clerks sent
out for pots of beer, the watchers drowsed, the candidates were
invisible--some said that they had gone to dine with the mayor. The
bludgeon-men and blackguards went home to sleep off their morning's
drink, and to recruit themselves for the orgy of the Chairing. The
crowd before the polling booth shrank to a knot of loafing lads and a
stray dog. At four Mottisfont still held the lead with 64 to 61.

But as the clock struck four the town awoke. Word went round that
a message from Sir Robert Peel would be read outside Basset's
Committee-room. Hearers were whipped up, and the message, having been
read with much parade, was posted up through the town and as promptly
pulled down. Animated by the message, and making as much of it as if
it had not been held back for the purpose, the Peelites polled
five-and-twenty votes in rapid succession, and at half-past four
issued a huge placard with:


                     Basset . . . . . 87
                     Mottisfont . . . 83
               Vote for Basset and the Big Loaf!
                         Basset wins!


Great was the enthusiasm, loud the cheering, vast the stir outside
their Committee-room. The Big and the Little Loaf waltzed out on their
poles. The placard, mounted as a banner, was entrusted to the two
Boshams. The band was ready, a dozen flares were ready, the Committee
were ready, all was ready for a last rally which might decide the one
or two doubtful voters. All was ready, but where was Mr. Basset? Where
was the candidate?

He could not be found, and great was the hubbub, vast the running to
and fro. "The Candidate? Where's the Candidate?" One ran to the Swan,
another to the polling-booth, a third to his agent's office. He could
not be found. All that was known of him or could be learned was that a
tall man, who looked like an undertaker, had stopped him near the
polling-booth and had kept him in talk for some minutes. From that
time he had been seen by no one.

Foul play was talked of, and the search went on, but meantime the
procession--the poll closed at half-past six--must start if it was to
do any good. It did so, and with its flares, its swaying placard, its
running riff-raff, now luridly thrown up by the lights, now lost in
shadow, formed the most picturesque scene that the election had
witnessed. The absence of the candidate was a drawback, and some shook
their heads over it. But the more knowing put their tongues in their
cheeks, aware that whether he were there or not, and whether they
marched or stayed at home, neither side would be a vote the better!

At half--past five the figures were,

                     Basset . . . . . 87

                     Mottisfont . . . 86


There were still fourteen votes to poll, and on the face of things
victory hung in the balance.

But at that hour Stubbs moved. He laid down his newspaper, gave
Farthingale an order, took up a slip of paper and his hat, and went by
way of the darkest street to The Butterflies. He walked thoughtfully,
with his chin on his breast, as if he had no great appetite for the
interview before him. By the time he reached the house the poll stood
at


                     Mottisfont . . . 96
                     Basset . . . . . 87


And long and loud was the cheering, wild the triumph of the landed
interest. The town was fuller than ever, for during the last hour the
farmers and their men had trooped in, Brown Heath had sent its
colliers, and a crowd filling every yard of space within eye-shot of
the polling-booth greeted the news. To hell with Peel! Down with
Cobden! Away with the League! Hurrah! Hurrah! Stubbs, had he been
there, would have been carried shoulder-high. Old Hayward was lifted
and carried, old Musters of the Audley Arms, one or two of the
Committee. It was known that four votes only remained unpolled, so
that Mottisfont's victory was secure.

At The Butterflies, whither the cheering of the crowd came in gusts
that rose and fell by turns, Stubbs nodded to the maid and went up the
stairs unannounced. Audley was writing at a side-table facing the
room. He looked up eagerly. "Well?" he said, putting down his quill.
"Is it over?"

Stubbs laid the slip of paper before him. "It's not over, my lord," he
answered soberly. "But that is the result. I am sorry that it is no
better."

Audley looked at the paper. "Nine!" he exclaimed. He looked at Stubbs,
he looked again at the paper. "Nine? Good G--d, man, you don't mean
it? You can't mean it! You don't mean that that is the best we could
do?"

"We hold the seat, my lord," Stubbs said.

"Hold the seat!" Audley replied, staring at him with furious eyes.
"Hold the seat? But I thought that it was a safe seat? I thought that
it was a seat that couldn't be lost! When five, only five, votes would
have cast it the other way! Why, man, you cannot have known anything
about it! No more about it than the first man in the street!"

"My lord----"

"Not a jot more!" Audley repeated. He had been prepared for something
like this, but the certainty that if he had cast his weight on the
other side, the side that had sinecures and places and pensions, he
would have turned the scale--this was too much for his temper. "Nine!"
he rapped out with another oath. "I can only think that the Election
has been mismanaged! Grievously, grievously mismanaged, Mr. Stubbs!"

"If your lordship thinks so----"

"I do!" Audley retorted, his certainty that the man before him had
thwarted his plans, carrying him farther than he intended. "I do!
Nine! Good G--d, man! When you assured me----"

"Whatever I assured your lordship," Stubbs said firmly, "I believed.
And--no, my lord, you must allow me to speak now--what I promised
would have been borne out--fully borne out by the result in normal
times. But I did not allow enough for the split in the party, nor for
the wave of madness----"

"As you think it!"

"And surely as your lordship also thinks it!" Stubbs rejoined smartly,
"that has swept over the country! In these circumstances it is
something to hold the seat, which a return to sanity will certainly
assure to us at the next election."

"The next election!" Audley muttered scornfully. For the moment he was
too angry to play a part or to drape his feelings.

"But if your lordship is dissatisfied----"

"Dissatisfied? I am d--nably dissatisfied."

"Then your lordship has the power," Stubbs said slowly, "to dispense
with my services."

"I know that, sir."

"And if you do not think fit to take that step, my lord----"

"I shall consider it!"

Another word or two and the deed had been done, for both men were too
angry to fence. But before that last word was spoken Audley's man
entered. He handed a card to his master and waited.

Audley looked at the card longer than was necessary and under cover of
the pause regained control of himself. "Who brought this?" he asked.

"A messenger from the Swan, my lord."

"Tell him----" He broke off. Holding out the card for Stubbs to take,
"Do you know anything about this?" he asked.

Stubbs returned the card. "No, my lord," he said coldly. "I know
nothing."

"Business of great importance to me? D--n his impudence, what business
important to me can he have?" Audley muttered. Then, "My compliments
to Mr. Basset and I am leaving in the morning, but I shall be at home
this evening at nine."

The servant retired. Audley looked askance at his agent. "You'd better
be here," he muttered ungraciously. "We can settle what we were
talking about later."

"Very good, my lord," Stubbs answered. And nothing more being said, he
took himself off.

He was not sorry that they had been interrupted. Much of his income
and more of his importance sprang from the Audley agency, but rather
than be treated as if he were a servant, he would surrender both--in
his way he was a proud man. Still he did not want to give up either;
and if time were given he thought that his lordship would think better
of the matter.

As he returned to his office, choosing the quiet streets by which
he had come, he had a glimpse, through an opening, of the distant
Market-place. A sound of cheering, a glare of smoky light, a medley of
leaping, running forms, a something uplifted above the crowd, moved
across his line of vision. Almost as quickly it vanished, leaving only
the reflection of retreating torches. "Hurrah! Hurrah for Mottisfont!
Hurrah!" Still the cheering came faintly to his ears.

He sighed. Riddsley had remained faithful-by nine! But he did not
deceive himself. It was the writing on the wall. The Corn Laws were
doomed, and with them much that he had loved, much that he cherished,
much in which he believed.




                            CHAPTER XXXVII

                         A TURN OF THE WHEEL


Audley was suspicious and ill at ease. Standing on the hearth-rug with
his back to the fire, he fixed the visitor with his eyes, and with
secret anxiety asked himself what he wanted. The possibility that
Basset came to champion Mary had crossed his mind more than once; if
that were so he would soon dispose of him! In the meantime he took
civility for his cue, exchanged an easy word or two about the poll and
the election, and between times nodded to Stubbs to be seated. Through
all, his eyes were watchful and he missed nothing.

"I asked Mr. Stubbs to be here," he said when a minute or two had been
spent in this by-play, "as you spoke of business. You don't object?"

"Not at all," Basset replied. His face was grave. "I should tell you
at once, Audley," he added, "that my mission is not a pleasant one."

The other raised his eyebrows. "You are sure that it concerns me?"

"It certainly concerns you. Though, as things stand, not very
materially. I knew nothing of the matter myself until three o'clock
to-day, and at first I doubted if it was my duty to communicate it.
But the facts are known to a third person, they may be used to annoy
you in the future, and though the task is unpleasant, I decided that I
had no option."

Audley set his broad shoulders against the mantel-shelf. "But if the
facts don't affect me?" he said.

"In a way they do. Not as they might under other circumstances. That
is all."

"And yet you are making our hair stand on end! I confess you puzzle
me. Well, let us have it. What is it all about?"

"A little time ago you recovered, if you remember, your Family Bible."
"Well? What of that?"

"I have just learned that the man did not hand over all that he had.
He kept back--it now appears--certain papers."

"Ah!" Audley's voice was stern. "Well, he has had his chance. This
time, I can promise him a warrant will follow."

"Perhaps you will hear me out first?"

"No," was the sharp reply. Audley's temper was getting the better of
him. "Last time, my dear fellow, you compounded with him; your motive
an excellent one I don't doubt. But if he now thinks to get more money
from me--and for other papers--I can promise him that he will see the
inside of Stafford gaol. Besides, my good friend, you gave us to
understand that he had surrendered all he had."

"I am afraid I did, and I fear I was wrong. Why he deceived me, and
has now turned about, I know no more than you do!"

"I think I can enlighten you," the other answered--his fears as well
as his temper were aroused. "The rogue is shallow. He thinks to be
paid twice. Once by you and once by me. But you can tell him that this
time he will be paid in other coin."

"I'm afraid that there is more in it than that," Basset said. "The
fact is the papers he now produces, Audley, are of another character."

"Oh! The wind blows in that quarter, does it?" my lord replied. "You
don't mean that you've come here--why, d--n it, man," with sudden
passion, "either you are very simple, or you are art and part----"

"Steady, steady, my lord," Stubbs said, interposing discreetly.
Hitherto he had not spoken. "There's no need to quarrel! I am sure
that Mr. Basset's intentions are friendly. It will be better if he
just tells us what these documents are which are now put forward. We
shall then be able to judge where we stand."

"Go ahead," Audley said, averting his face and sulkily relapsing
against the mantel-shelf. "Put your questions! And, for God's sake,
let's get to the point!"

"The paper that is pertinent is a deed," Basset explained. "I have the
heads of it here. A deed made between Peter Paravicini Audley, your
ancestor, the Audley the date of whose marriage has been always in
issue--between him on the one side, and his father and two younger
brothers on the other."

"What is the date?" Stubbs asked.

"Seventeen hundred and four."

"Very good, Mr. Basset." Stubbs's tone was now as even as he could
make it, but an acute listener would have detected a change in it.
"Proceed, if you please."

Before Basset could comply, my lord broke in. "What's the use of this?
Why the d--l are we going into it?" he cried. "If this man is out for
plunder I will make him smart as sure as my name is Audley! And any
one who supports him. In the meantime I want to hear no more of it!"

Basset moved in his chair as if he would rise. Stubbs intervened.

"That is one way of looking at it, my lord," he said temperately. "And
I'm not saying that it is the wrong way. But I think we had better
hear what Mr. Basset has to say. He is probably deceived----"

"He has let himself be used as a catspaw!" Audley cried. His face was
flushed and there was an ugly look in his eyes.

"But he means us well, I am sure," the lawyer interposed. "At present
I don't see"--he turned and carefully snuffed one of the candles--"I
don't see----"

"I think you do!" Basset answered. He had had a long day and he had
come on an unpleasant business. His own temper was not too good. "You
see this, at any rate, Mr. Stubbs, that such a deed may be of vital
import to your client."

"To me?" Audley exclaimed. Was it possible that the thing he had so
long feared--and had ceased to fear--was going to befall him? Was it
possible that at the eleventh hour, when he had burnt his boats, when
he had thought all danger at an end--no, it was impossible! "To me?"
he repeated passionately.

"Yes," Basset replied. "Or, rather, it would be of vital import to you
in other circumstances."

"In what other circumstances? What do you mean?"

"If you were not about to marry the only person who, with you, is
interested."

Audley cut short, by a tremendous effort, the execration that burst
from his lips. His face, always too fleshy for his years, swelled till
it was purple. Then, and as quickly, the blood ebbed, leaving it gray
and flabby. He would have given much, very much at this moment to be
able to laugh or to utter a careless word. But he could do neither.
The blow had been too sudden, too heavy, too overwhelming. Only in his
nightmares had he seen what he saw now!

Meanwhile Stubbs, startled by the half-uttered oath and a little out
of his depth--for he had heard nothing of the engagement--intervened.
"I think, my lord," he said, "you had better leave this to me. I think
you had, indeed. We are quite in the dark and we are not getting
forward. Let us have the facts, Mr. Basset. What is the gist of this
deed? Or, first, have you seen it?"

"I have."

"And read it?"

"I have."

"It appears to you--I only say it appears--to be genuine?"

"I have no doubt that it is genuine," Basset replied. "It bears the
marks of age, and it was found in the chest with the old Bible. If the
book is genuine----"

The lawyer raised his hand. "Too fast," he said. "You say it was
found! You mean that this man says it was found?"

"Yes."

"Precisely. But there is a difference. Still, we have cleared the
ground. Now, what does this deed purport to be?"

Basset produced a slip of paper. "An agreement," he read from it,
"between Peter Paravicini Audley and his father and his two younger
brothers. After admitting that the entry of the marriage in the
register is misleading and that no marriage took place until after the
birth of his son, Peter Paravicini undertakes that, in consideration
of his father and his brothers taking no action and making no attack
upon his wife's reputation, she being their cousin, he will not set up
for the said son, or the issue of the said son, any claim to the title
or estates."

Audley listened to the description, so clear and so precise, and he
recognized that it tallied with the deed which tradition had always
held to exist but of which John Audley had been able to give no proof.
He heard, he understood; yet while he listened and understood, his
mind was working to another end, and viewing with passion the tragedy
which fate had prepared for him. Too late! Too late! Had this become
known a week, only a week, earlier, how lightly had the blow fallen!
How impotently! But he had cut the rope, he had severed the strands
once carefully twisted, that bound him to safety! And then the irony,
the bitterness, the cruelty of those words of Basset's, "in other
circumstances!" They bit into his mind.

Still he suffered in silence, and only his stillness and his unhealthy
color betrayed the despair that gripped and benumbed his soul. Stubbs
did not look at him; perhaps he was careful not to look at him. The
lawyer sat thinking and drumming gently with his fingers on the table.
"Just so, just so," he said presently. "On the face of it, the
document of which Mr. John Audley tried to give secondary evidence,
and which a person fraudulently inclined would of course concoct. That
touch of the cousin well brought in!"

"But the lady was his cousin," Basset said.

"All the world knows it," the lawyer retorted coolly, "and use has
been made of the knowledge. But, of course, there are a hundred things
to be proved before any weight can be given to this document; its
origin, the custody from which it comes, the signatures, the
witnesses. Its production by a man who has once endeavored to
blackmail is alone suspicious. And the deed itself is at variance with
the evidence of the Bible."

"But that variance bears out the deed, which is to secure the younger
sons' rights while covering the reputation of the lady."

The lawyer shook his head. "Very clever," he said. "But, frankly, the
matter has an ugly look, Mr. Basset."

"Lord Audley says nothing," Basset replied, nettled by the lawyer's
phrase.

"And will say nothing," Stubbs rejoined genially, "if he is advised by
me. In the circumstances, as I understand them, he is not affected as
he might be, but this is still a serious matter. We are not
quarrelling with you for coming to us, Mr. Basset. On the contrary.
But I would like to know why the man came to you."

"The answer is simple," Basset explained. "I am Mr. Audley's executor.
On his account, I am obliged to be interested. The moment I learned
this I saw that, be it true or false, I must disclose it to Miss
Audley. But I thought it fair to open it to Lord Audley first that he
might tell the young lady himself, if he preferred to do so."

Stubbs nodded. "Very proper," he replied. "And where, in the meantime,
is this--precious document?"

"I lodged it with Mr. Audley's bankers this afternoon."

Stubbs nodded again. "Also very proper," he said. "Just so."

Basset rose. "I've told you what I know. If there is nothing more?" he
said. He looked at Audley, who had turned his back on them and, with
his hands in his pockets and one foot on the fender, was gazing into
the fire.

"I think that's all," Stubbs hastened to say. "I am sure that his
lordship is obliged to you, Mr. Basset, though it is a hundred to one
that there is nothing in this."

At that, however, Audley turned about. He had pulled himself together,
and his manner was excellent. "I would like to say that for myself,"
he said frankly, "I owe you many thanks for the straightforward course
you have taken, Basset. You must pardon my momentary annoyance.
Perhaps you will kindly keep this business to yourself for--shall we
say--three days? I will speak myself to my cousin, but I should like
to make one or two inquiries first."

Basset agreed willingly. He hated the whole thing and his part in it.
It forced him to champion, or to seem to champion, Mary against her
betrothed; and so set him in that kind of opposition to his rival
which he loathed. It was only after some hesitation that he had
determined to see Audley, and now that he had seen him, the sooner he
was clear of the matter the happier he would be. So, "Certainly," he
repeated, thinking that the other was taking it very well. "And now,
as I have had a hard day, I will say good-night."

"Good-night, and believe me," my lord added warmly, "we recognize the
friendliness of your action."

Outside, in the darkness of the road, Basset drew a breath of relief.
He had had a hard day and he was utterly weary. But he had come now,
thank God, to an end of many things; of the canvass he had detested
and the contest in which he had been beaten; of his relations with
Mary, whom he had lost; of this imbroglio, which he hated; of Riddsley
and the Gatehouse and the old life there! He could go to his inn and
sleep the clock round. In his bed he would be safe, he would be free
from troubles. It seemed to him a refuge. Till the morrow he need
think of nothing, and when he came forth again it would be to a new
life. Henceforth Blore, his old house and his starved acres must bound
his ambitions. With the money which John Audley had left him he would
dig and drain and fence and build, and be by turns Talpa the mole and
Castor the beaver. In time, as he began to see the fruit of his toil,
he would win to some degree of content, and be glad, looking back,
that he had made this trial of his powers, this essay towards a wider
usefulness. So, in the end, he would come through to peace.

But at this point the current of his thoughts eddied against Toft, and
he cursed the man anew. Why had he played these tricks? Why had he
kept back this paper? Why had he produced it now and cast on others
this unpleasant task?




                           CHAPTER XXXVIII

                        TOFT'S LITTLE SURPRISE


Toft had gone into Riddsley on the polling-day, but had returned
before the result was known. "What the man was thinking of," his wife
declared in wrath, "beats me! To be there hours and hours and come out
no wiser than he went, and we waiting to hear--a babe would ha' had
more sense! The young master that we've known all our lives, to be in
or out, and we to know nothing till morning! It passes patience!"

Mary had her own feelings, but she concealed them. "He must know how
it was going when he left?" she said.

"He doesn't know an identical thing!" Mrs. Toft replied. "And all he'd
say was, 'There, there, what does it matter?' For all the world as if
he spoke to a child! 'What else matters, man?' says I. 'What did you
go for?' But there, Miss, he's beyond me these days! I believe he's
going like the poor master, that had a bee in his bonnet, God forgive
me for saying it! But what'd one not say, and we to wait till morning
not knowing whether those plaguy Repealers are in or out!"

"But Mr. Basset is for Repeal," Mary said.

"What matter what he's for, if he's in?" Mrs. Toft replied loftily.
"But to wait till morning to know--the man's no better than a numps!"

In the end, it was Mr. Colet who brought the news to the Gatehouse. He
brought it to Etruria and so much of moment with it that before noon
the election result had been set aside as a trifle, and Mary found
herself holding a kind of court in the parlor--Mr. Colet plaintiff,
Etruria defendant, Mrs. Toft counsel for the defence. Absence had but
strengthened Mr. Colet's affection, and he came determined to come to
an understanding with his mistress. He saw his way to making a small
income by writing sermons for his more indolent brethren, and, in the
meantime, Mr. Basset was giving him food and shelter; in return he was
keeping Mr. Basset's accounts, and he was saving a little, a very
little, money. But the body of his plea rested not on these counts,
but on the political change. Repeal was in the air, repeal was in the
country. Vote as Riddsley might, the Corn Laws were doomed. His
opinions would no longer be banned; they would soon be the opinions of
the majority, and with a little patience he might find a new curacy.
When that happened he wished to marry Etruria.

"And why not?" Mary asked.

"I will never marry him to disgrace him," Etruria replied. She stood
with bowed head, her hands clasped before her, her beautiful eyes
lowered.

"But you love him?" Mary said, blushing at her own words.

"If I did not love him I might marry him," Etruria rejoined. "I am a
servant, my father's a servant. I should be wronging him, and he would
live to know it."

"To my way o' thinking, 'Truria's right," her mother said. "I never
knew good come of such a marriage! He's poor, begging his reverence's
pardon, but, poor or rich, his place is there." She pointed to the
table. "And 'Truria's place is behind his chair."

"But you forget," Mary said, "that when she is Mr. Colet's wife her
place will be by his side."

"And much good that'll do him with the parsons and such like, as are
all gleg together! If he's in their black books for preaching too
free--and when you come to tithes one parson is as like another as
pigs o' the same litter--he'll not better himself by taking such as
Etruria, take my word for it, Miss!"

"I will never do it," said Etruria.

"But," Mary protested, "Mr. Colet need not live here, and in another
part people will not know what his wife has been. Etruria has good
manners and some education, Mrs. Toft, and what she does not know she
will learn. She will be judged by what she is. If there is a drawback,
it is that such a marriage will divide her from you and from her
father. But if you are prepared for that?"

Mrs. Toft rubbed her nose. "We'd be willing if that were all," she
