"I am going to," the showman answered, with an ugly look. He plucked
the boy almost off his feet as he spoke, and while the men cried after
him "_Bon appétit!_" and jeered, dragged him away across the open part
of the market; finally disappearing with him in one of the noisome
alleys which then led out of the Halles on the east side.

His way lay through a rabbit-warren of beetling passages and narrow
lanes, where the boy, once loose, could have dodged him a hundred ways
and escaped; and he held him with the utmost precaution, expecting him
every moment to make a desperate attempt at it. But Jehan was not the
old Jehan who had turned and twisted, walked and frolicked on the
rope, and in the utmost depths of ill-treatment had still kept teeth
to bite and spirit to use them. He was benumbed body and soul. He had
had no food for nearly twenty hours. He had passed the night exposed
to the cold. He had gone through intense excitement, horror, despair.
So he stumbled along, with Vidoche's dying cries in his ears, and,
famished, frozen, bemused, met the showman's threats with a face of
fixed, impassive apathy. He was within a very little of madness.

For a time Crafty Eyes did not heed this strange impassiveness. The
showman's fancy was busy with the punishment he would inflict when he
got the boy home to his miserable room. He gloated in anticipation
over the tortures he would contrive, and the care he would take that
they should not maim or disfigure the boy. When he had him tied down,
and the door locked, and the poker heated--ah! how he would enjoy
himself! The ruffian licked his lips. His eyes sparkled with pleasure.
He jerked the boy along in his hideous impatience.

But after a time the child's bearing began to annoy him. He stopped
and, holding him with one hand, beat him brutally on the head with the
other, until the boy fell and hung in his grasp. Then he dragged him
up roughly and hauled him on with volleys of oaths; still scowling at
him from time to time, as if, somehow, he found this little foretaste
of vengeance less satisfying than he had expected.

There were people coming and going in the dark filthy lane where this
happened--a place where smoke-grimed gables almost met overhead, and
the gutter was choked with refuse--but no one interfered. What was a
little beating more or less? Or, for the matter of that, what was a
boy more or less? The hulking loafers and frowsy slatterns, who
huddled for warmth in corners, nodded their heads and looked on
approvingly. They had their own brats to beat and business to mind.
There was no one to take the boy's part. And another hundred yards
would lodge him in the showman's garret.

At that last moment the boy awoke from his trance and understood; and
in a convulsion of fear hung back and struggled, screaming and
throwing himself down. The man dragged him up savagely, and was in the
act of taking him up bodily to carry him, when a person, who had
already passed the pair once, came back and looked at the boy again.
The next moment a hand fell on the showman's arm, and a voice said,
"Stop! What boy is that?"

The showman looked up, saw that the intervener was a priest, and
sneered. "What is that to you, father?" he said, trying by a side
movement to pass by. "Not one of your flock, at any rate."

"No, but you are!" the priest retorted in a strangely sonorous voice.
He was a stalwart man, with a mobile face and sad eyes that seemed out
of keeping with the rest of him. "You are! And if you do not this
minute set him down and answer my question, you ruffian, when your
time comes you shall go to the tree alone!"

"Diable!" the showman muttered, startled yet scowling. "Who are you,
then?"

"I am Father Bernard. Now tell me about that boy, and truly. What have
you been doing to him? Ay, you may well tremble, rascal!"

For the showman was trembling. In the Paris of that day the name of
Father Bernard was almost as well known as the name of Cardinal
Richelieu. There was not a night-prowler or cutpurse, bully or
swindler, who did not know it, and dream in his low fits, when the
drink was out and the money spent, of the day when he would travel by
Father Bernard's side to Montfaucon, and find no other voice and no
other eye to pity him in his trouble. Impelled by feelings of
humanity, rare at that time, this man made it his life-work to attend
on all who were cast for execution; to wait on them in prison, and be
with them at the last, and by his presence and words of comfort to
alleviate their sufferings here, and bring them to a better mind. He
had become so well known in this course of work that the king himself
did him honour, and the Cardinal granted him special rights. The mob
also. The priest passed unharmed through the lowest wynds of Paris,
and penetrated habitually to places where the Lieutenant of the
Châtelet, with a dozen pikes at his back, would not have been safe for
a moment.

This was the man whose stern voice brought the showman to a
standstill. Master Crafty Eyes faltered. Then he remembered that the
boy was his boy, that his title to him was good. He said so sulkily.

"Your boy?" the priest replied, frowning. "Who are you, then?"

"An acrobat, father."

"So I thought. But do acrobats' boys wear black velvet clothes with
silver buttons?"

"He was stolen from me," the showman answered eagerly. He had a good
conscience as to the clothes. "I have only just recovered him,
father."

"Who stole him? Where has he been?" The priest spoke quickly, and with
no little excitement. He looked narrowly at the boy the while, holding
him at arm's length. "Where did he spend last night, for instance?"

The showman spread out his palms and shrugged his shoulders. "How
should I know?" he said. "I was not with him."

"He has black hair and blue eyes!"

"Yes. But what of that?" Crafty Eyes answered. "I can swear to him. He
is my boy."

"And mine!" Father Bernard retorted with energy. "The boy I want!" The
priest's eyes sparkled, his form seemed to dilate with triumph. "Deo
laus! Deo laus!" he murmured sonorously, so that a score of loiterers
who had gathered round, and were staring and shivering by turns, fell
back affrighted and crossed themselves. "He is the boy! God has put
him in my way this day as clearly as if an angel had led me by the
hand. And he goes with me; he goes with me. Chut, man!"--this to the
showman, who stood frowning in his path--"don't dare to look black at
me. The boy goes with me, I say. I want him for a purpose. If you
choose you can come too."

"Whither?"

"To the Châtelet," Father Bernard answered, with a grim chuckle. "You
don't seem to relish the idea. But do as you please."

"You will take the boy?"

"This moment," the priest answered.

"_Mon Dieu!_ but you shall not!" the showman exclaimed. Wrath for the
moment drove out fear. He seized the child by the arm. "He is my boy!
You shall not, I say!" he cried, almost foaming with rage. "He is
mine!"


[Illustration: "'WHO STOLE HIM? WHERE HAS HE BEEN?'" (_p_. 169).]


"Idiot! Beast! Gallows-bird!" the priest thundered in reply. "For
one-half of a denier I would throw you into the next street! Let go,
or I will blast you with--Oh, it is well for you you are reasonable.
Now begone! Begone! or, at a word from me, there are a score here
will----"

He did not finish his sentence, for the showman fell back
panic-stricken, and stood off among the crowd, malevolence and craven
fear struggling for the mastery in his countenance. The priest took
the boy up gently in his arms and looked at him. His face grew
strangely mild as he did so. The black brows grew smooth, the lips
relaxed. "Get a little water," he said to the nearest man, a hulking,
olive-skinned Southerner. "The child has swooned."

"Your pardon, father," the man answered. "He is dead."

But Father Bernard shook his head. "No, my son," he said kindly. "He
who led me here to-day will keep life in him a little longer. God's
ways never end in a _cul-de-sac_. Get the water. He has swooned only."




                             CHAPTER IX.

                          BEFORE THE COURT.


Since the poisoning of the Prince of Condé by his servant, Brillaut,
at the instigation--as was alleged and commonly believed--of Madame la
Princesse, no tragedy of the kind had caused a greater sensation in
Paris, or been the subject of more talk, than the murder of M. de
Vidoche. The remarkable circumstances which attended it--and which
lost nothing in the narration--its immediate discovery, the apparent
lack of motive, and the wealth, rank, and youth of the guilty wife,
all helped, with the fulness of Paris at this time and the absence of
any stirring political news, to make it the one topic of interest.
Nothing else was talked of in chamber or tennis court, in the Grand
Gallery at the Louvre, or in the cardinal's ante-room at the Palais
Richelieu. Culprit and victim were alike well known. M. de Vidoche, if
no favourite, had been at least a conspicuous figure in society. He
had been cast for one of the parts in the royal troupe at the
Christmas carnival. His flirtation with Mademoiselle de Farincourt had
been sufficiently marked to cause both amusement and interest. And if
madame was a less familiar figure at Court, if she had a reputation
somewhat prudish, and an air of rusticity that did not belie it, and
was even less of a favourite than her husband, her position as a great
heiress and the last of an old family gave her a _cachet_ which did
not fail to make her interesting now.

Gladly would the great ladies in their coaches have gone down to the
Châtelet to stare at her after the cruel fashion of that day; and,
after buzzing round her in her misery, have gone away with a hundred
tales of how she looked, and what she wore, and what she said in
prison. But madame was saved this--this torture worse than the
question--by the physician's order that no one should be admitted to
her. He laid this down so strenuously--telling the lieutenant that if
she had not complete repose for twenty-four hours he would be
answerable neither for her life nor her reason--that that officer,
who, like the Chevalier du Guet, was an old soldier, replied "No" to
the most pressing insistences; and save and except Father Bernard, who
had the _entrée_ at all hours by the king's command, would let no one
go in to her. "It will be bad enough by-and-bye," he said, with an
oath. "If she did it, she will be punished. But she shall have a
little peace to-day."

But the great world, baffled on this point, grew only the more
curious; circulated stories only the more outrageous; and nodded and
winked and whispered only the more assiduously. Would she be put to
the question? And by the rack, or the boot, or the water torture? And
who was the man? Of course there was a man. Now if it had been M. de
Vidoche who had poisoned her, that would have been plain,
intelligible, perspicuous; since everyone knew--and so on, and so on,
with Mademoiselle de Farincourt's name at intervals.

It was believed that madame would be first examined in private; but
late at night, on the day before Christmas Eve, a sealed order came to
the Lieutenant of the Châtelet, commanding him to present madame, with
her servants and all concerned in the case, at the Palais de Justice
on the following morning. Late as it was, the news was known in every
part of Paris that night. Marshal Bassompierre, lying in the Bastille,
heard it, and regretted he could not see the sight. It was rumoured
that the king would attend in person; even that the trial had been
hastened for his pleasure. It was certain that half the Court would be
there, and the other half, if it could find room. The great ladies,
who had failed to storm the Châtelet, hoped to succeed better at the
Palais, and the First President of the Court, and even the
Commissioners appointed to sit with him, found their doors beset at
dawn with delicate "_poulets_," or urgent, importunate applications.

Madame de Vidoche, the man and maid, were brought from the Châtelet to
the Conciergerie an hour before daylight--madame in her coach, with
her woman, the man on foot. That cold morning ride was such as few,
thank God, are called on to endure. To the horrors of anticipation the
lost wife, scarcely more than a girl, had to add the misery of
retrospection; to the knowledge of what she had done, a woman's
shrinking from the doom that threatened her, from shame and pain and
death. But that which she felt perhaps as keenly as anything, as she
crouched in a corner of her curtained vehicle and heard the yells
which everywhere saluted its appearance, was the sudden sense of
loneliness and isolation. True, the Lieutenant sat opposite to her,
but his face was hard. She was no longer a woman to him, but a
prisoner, a murderess, a poisoner. And the streets were thronged, in
spite of the cold and the early hour. On the Pont au Change the people
ran beside the coach and strove to get a sight of her, and jeered and
sang and shouted. And at the entrance to the Palais, in the room in
the Conciergerie where she had to wait, on the staircase to the court
above, everywhere it was the same; all were set so thick with
faces--staring, curious faces--that the guards could scarcely make a
way for her. But she was cut off from all. She was no longer of
them--of things living. Not one said a kind word to her; not one
looked sympathy or pity. On a sudden, in a moment, with hundreds
gazing at her, she, a delicate woman, found herself a thing apart,
unclean, to be shunned. A thing, no longer a person. A prisoner, no
longer a woman.

They placed a seat for her, and she sank into it, feeling at first
nothing but the shame of being so stared at. But presently she had to
rise and be sworn, and then, as she became conscious of other things,
as the details of the crowded chamber forced themselves on her
attention, and she saw which were the judges, and heard herself called
upon to answer the questions that should be put to her, the instinct
of self-preservation, the desire to clear herself, to escape and live,
took hold of her. A late instinct, for hitherto all her thoughts had
been of the man she had killed--her husband; but the fiercer for that.
A burning flush suddenly flamed in her cheeks. Her eyes grew bright,
her heart began to beat quickly. She turned giddy.

She knew only of one way in which she could escape; only of one man
that could help her; and even while the first judge was in the act of
calling upon her, she turned from him and looked round. She looked to
the right, to the left, then behind her, for Nôtredame. He, if he told
the truth, could clear her! He could say that she had come to him for
a charm, and not for poison! And he only! But where was he? There was
her woman, trembling and weeping, waiting to be called. There was the
valet, pale and frightened. There were twice a hundred indifferent
people. But Nôtredame? He was not visible. He was not there. When she
had satisfied herself of this, she sank back with a moan of despair.
She gave up hope again. A hundred curious eyes saw the colour fade
from her cheeks; her eyes grew dull, the whole woman collapsed.

The examination began. She gave her name in a hollow whisper.

It was the practice of that day, and still is, in French courts, to
take advantage of any self-betrayal or emotion on the part of the
accused person. It is the duty of the judges to observe the prisoner
constantly and narrowly; and the First President, on an occasion such
as this, was not the man to overlook anything which was visible to the
ordinary spectator. Instead, therefore, of pursuing the regular
interrogatory he had in his mind, he leaned forward and asked madame
what was the matter.

"I wish for the man Solomon Nôtredame," Madame de Vidoche answered,
rising and speaking in a choking voice.

"That is the man from whom you bought the poison, I think?" the judge
answered, affecting to look at his notes.

"Yes, but as a love-philtre--not a poison," madame said in a whisper.
"I wish him to be here."

"You wish to be confronted with him?"

"Yes."

"With the man Solomon Nôtredame?"

"Yes."

"Then you shall be, presently," the judge replied, leaning back, and
casting a singular glance at his colleagues. "Be satisfied. And now,
madame," he continued gravely, as his eyes returned to her, "it is my
duty to help you to tell, and your duty to confess frankly, all that
you know concerning this matter. Be good enough, therefore, to collect
yourself, and answer my questions fully and truly, as you hope for
mercy here and hereafter. So you will save yourself pain, and such
also as shall examine you; and may best deserve, in the worst case,
the king's indulgence."

As he uttered this exhortation madame clung to the bar behind which
she stood, and seemed for the moment about to faint, so that the
President waited awhile before he proceeded. She looked, indeed,
ghostly. Her white face gleamed through the fog--which, rising from
the river, was fast filling the chamber--like a face seen for an
instant on a wreck through mist and spray and tempest. Ladies who had
known her as an equal, and who now gazed heartlessly down at her from
galleries, felt a pleasant thrill of excitement, and whispered that
they had not braved the early cold for nothing. There was not a man in
the court who did not expect to see her fall.

But there is in women a power of endurance far exceeding that of men.
By an immense effort madame regained control over herself. She
answered the President's opening questions faintly but clearly; and,
being led at once to tell of her visit to Nôtredame, had sufficient
sense of her position to dwell plainly on the two facts important to
her--that the object of her visit was a love-potion, and not a poison,
and that the instructions first given to her were to take it herself.
The latter assertion produced a startling impression in the court. It
was completely unexpected; and though ninety-nine out of a hundred
fancied it the bold invention of a desperate woman, all allowed that
it added zest to the case.

Naturally the President pressed her hard on these points. He strove,
both by cajolery and by stating objections, to make her withdraw from
them. But she would not. Nor could he entrap her into narrating
anything at variance with them. At length he desisted. "Very well, we
will leave that," he said; and so subtly had her story gained sympathy
for her that the sigh of relief uttered in the court was perfectly
audible. "We will pass on, if you please. The boy who overtook you in
the street, and, as you say, altered all? Who was he, madame?"

"I do not know."

"You had seen him before?"

"No."

"Did he not open the door at this Nôtredame's when you entered the
house?"

"No."

"Nor when you left?"

"No."

"How did you know, then, madame, that he came from this abominable
person whom you had been visiting?"

"He said he did."

"And do you tell us," the judge retorted, "that on the mere word of
this boy, whom you did not know and had never seen, without the
assurance of any token or countersign, you disregarded the man
Nôtredame's directions on the most vital point, and, instead of taking
this drug yourself, gave it to your husband?"

"I do."

"Without suspecting that it was other than that for which you had
asked?"

"Yes."

"Madame," the judge said slowly, "it is incredible." He looked for a
moment at his colleagues, as if to collect their opinions. They
nodded. He turned to her again. "Do you not see that?" he said almost
kindly.

"I do not," madame answered firmly. "It is true."

"Describe the boy, if you please."

"He had--I think he had dark clothes," she answered, faltering for the
first time. "He looked about twelve years old."

"Yes," the President said; "go on."

"He had--I could not see any more," madame muttered faintly. "It was
dark."

"And do you expect us to believe this?" the President replied with
warmth, real or assumed. "Do you expect us to believe such a story? Or
that it was at the instance of this boy only--this boy of whom you
knew nothing, whom you cannot describe, whom you had never seen
before--that it was at his instance only that you gave this drug to
your husband, instead of taking it yourself?"

She reeled slightly, clinging to the bar. The court swam before her.
She saw, as he meant her to see, the full hopelessness of her
position, the full strength of the case which fate had made against
her, her impotence, her helplessness. Yet she forced herself to make
an effort. "It is the truth," she said, in a broken voice. "I loved
him."

"Ah!" the President replied cynically. He repressed by a gesture a
slight disturbance at the rear of the court. "That, of course. It is
part of the story. Or why a love-philtre? But do you not see, madame,"
he continued, bending his brows and speaking in the tone he used to
common criminals, "that all the wives in Paris might poison their
husbands, and when they were found out say 'It was a love-potion,' if
you are to escape? No, no; we must have some better tale than that."

She looked at him in terror and shame. "I have no other," she cried
wildly. "That is the truth. If you do not believe me, there is
Nôtredame. Ask him."

"You applied to be confronted with him some time back," the President
answered, looking aside at his colleagues, who nodded. "Is that still
your desire?"

She murmured "Yes," with dry lips.

"Then let him be called," the judge answered solemnly. "Let Solomon
Nôtredame be called and confronted with the accused."

The order was received with a general stir, a movement of curiosity
and expectation. Those in the galleries leaned forward to see the
better; those at the back stood up. Madame, with her lips parted and
her breath coming quickly--madame, the poor centre of all--gazed with
her soul in her eyes towards the door at which she saw others gazing.
All for her depended on this man--the man she was about to see. Would
he lie and accuse her? Or would he tell the truth and corroborate her
story--say, in a word, that she had come for a love-charm, and not for
poison? Surely this last? Surely it would be to his interest?

But while she gazed with her soul in her eyes, the door which had been
partly opened fell shut again, and disappointed her. At the same
moment there was a general movement and rustling round her, an
uprising in every part of the chamber. In bewilderment, almost in
impatience, she turned towards the judges and found that they had
risen too. Then through a door behind them she saw six gentlemen file
in, with a flash and sparkle of colour that lit up the sombre bench.
The first was the king.

Louis was about thirty-five years old at this time--a dark, sallow
man, wearing black, with a wide-leafed hat, in which a costly diamond
secured a plume of white feathers. He carried a walking cane, and
saluted the judges as he entered, Three gentlemen--two about the
king's age, the third a burly, soldierly man of sixty--followed him,
and took their places behind the canopied chair placed for him. The
fifth to enter--but he passed behind the judges and took a chair which
stood on their left--wore a red robe trimmed with fur, and a small red
cap. He was a man of middle height and pale complexion, keen Italian
features and bright piercing eyes, and so far was not remarkable. But
he had also a coal-black moustache and chin tuft, and milk-white hair;
and this contrast won him recognition everywhere. He was Armand Jean
du Plessis, Duke and Cardinal Richelieu, soldier, priest, and
playwriter, and for sixteen years the ruler of France.

Madame gazed at them with a beating heart, with wild hopes that would
rise, despite herself. But, oh God! how coldly their eyes met hers!
With what a stony stare! With what curiosity, indifference, contempt!
Alas, they had come for that. They had come to stare. This was their
Christmas show--part of their Christmas revels. And she--she was a
woman on her trial, a poisoner, a murderess, a vile thing to be
questioned, tortured, dragged to a shameful death!

For a moment or two the king talked with the judges. Then he sat back
in his chair. The President made a sign, and an usher in a sonorous
voice cried, "Solomon Nôtredame! Let Solomon Nôtredame stand forth!"




                              CHAPTER X.

                            TWO WITNESSES.


Madame de Vidoche heard the name and braced herself again, turning
towards the door as others turned, and waiting with dry lips and
feverish eyes for the man who was to save her--to save her in spite of
king and court. Would he never come? The door stood open, remained
open. She could see through it the passage with its bare walls and
dusky ceiling, and hear in the hushed silence a noise of shuffling
feet. Gradually the noise grew louder; though it still seemed a thing
by itself, and so distant that in the court where they waited, with
every eye expectant, the slightest sound, the lowest whisper was
audible. When the usher cried again, "Solomon Nôtredame, stand
forward!" more than one glanced at him angrily. He balked their
expectation.

Ha! at last! But they were carrying him! Madame shivered slightly as
she watched the four men come slowly along the passage, bearing a
chair between them. At the door they stumbled and paused, giving her
time to think. They had been racking him, then, and he could not walk;
she might have guessed it. Her cheek, white before, became a shade
ghastlier, and she clutched the bar with a firmer grip.

They brought him slowly down the three steps and through the narrow
passage towards her. The men who carried him blocked her view, but she
saw presently that there was something odd about his head. When they
set him down, three paces from her, she saw what it was. His face was
covered. There was a loose cloth over his head, and he leaned forward
in a strange way.

What did it mean? She began to tremble, gazing at him wildly,
expecting she knew not what. And he did not move.


[Illustration: "THEY WERE CARRYING HIM" (_p_. 192).]


Suddenly the President's solemn voice broke the silence. "Madame," he
said--but it seemed to her that he was speaking a long way off--"here
is your witness. You asked to be confronted with him, and the court,
hoping that this may be the more merciful way of inducing you to
confess your crime, assent to the request. But I warn you that he is a
witness not for you, but against you. He has confessed."

For a moment she looked dumbly at the speaker; then her eyes went back
to the veiled figure in the chair--it had a horrible attraction for
her.

"Unhappy woman," the President continued, in solemn accents, "he has
confessed. Will you now, before you look upon him, do likewise?"

She shook her head. She would have denied, protested, cried that she
was not guilty; but her throat was parched--she had lost her voice,
hope, all. There was a drumming noise in the court; or perhaps it was
in her head. It was growing dark, too.

"He has confessed," she heard the President go on--but he was speaking
a long, long way off now, and his voice came to her ears dully--"by
executing on himself that punishment which otherwise the law would
have imposed. Are you still obstinate? Let the face be uncovered then.
Now, wretched woman, look on your accomplice."

Perhaps he spoke in mercy, and to prepare her; for she looked, and
did not at once swoon, though the sight of that dead yellow face, with
its stony eyes and open mouth, drew shrieks from more than one. The
self-poisoner had done his work well. The sombre features wore even in
death a cynical grin, the lips a smile of triumph. But this was on the
surface. In the glassy eyes, dull and lustreless, lurked--as all saw
who gazed closely--a horror; a look of sudden awakening, as if in the
moment of dissolution the wicked man had come face to face with
judgment; and, triumphant over his earthly foes, had met on the
threshold of the dark world a shape that froze the very marrow in his
bones.

Grimmest irony that he who had so long sported with the things of
death, and traded on men's fear of it, should himself be brought here
dead, to be exposed and gazed at! Of small use now his tricks and
chemicals, his dark knowledge and the mystery in which he had wrapped
himself. Orcus had him, grim head, black heart and all.

A moment, I have said, madame stared. Then gradually the truth, the
hideous truth, came home to her. He was dead! He had killed himself!
The horror of it overcame her at last. With a shuddering cry she fell
swooning to the floor.

When she came to herself again--after how long an interval she
could not tell--and the piled faces and sharp outlines of the court
began to shape themselves out of the mist, her first thought, as
remembrance returned, was of the ghastly figure in the chair. With an
effort--someone was sponging her forehead, and would have restrained
her--she turned her head and looked. To her relief it was gone. She
sighed, and closing her eyes lay for a time inert, hearing the hum of
voices, but paying no attention. But gradually the misery of her
position took hold of her again, and with a faint moan she looked up.

In a moment she fell to trembling and crying softly, for her eyes met
those of the woman who stooped over her and read there something new,
strange, wonderful--kindness. The woman patted her hand softly, and
murmured to her to be still and to listen. She was listening herself
between times, and presently madame followed her example.

Dull as her senses still were, she noticed that the king sat forward
with an odd keen look on his face, that the judges seemed startled,
that even the Cardinal's pale features were slightly flushed. And not
one of all had eyes for her. They were looking at a boy who stood at
the end of the table, beside a priest. The cold light from a window
fell full on his face, and he was speaking. "I listened," she heard
him say. "Yes."

"And how long a time elapsed before Madame de Vidoche came?" the
President asked, continuing, apparently, an examination of which she
had missed the first part.

"Half an hour, I think," the boy answered, in a clear, bold tone.

"You are sure it was poison he required?"

"I am sure."

"And madame?"

"A love-philtre."

"You heard both interviews?"

"Both."

"You are sure of the arrangement made between Vidoche and this man, of
which you have told us? That the poison should be given to madame in
the form of a love-philtre? That she might take it herself?"

"I am sure."

"And it was you who ran after Madame de Vidoche and told her that the
draught was to be given to her husband instead?"

"Yes."

"Do you acknowledge, then," the President continued slowly, "that it
was you who, in fact, killed M. de Vidoche?"

For the first time the boy faltered and stumbled, and looked this way
and that as if for a chance of escape. But there was none, and Father
Bernard, by laying his hand on his arm, seemed to give him courage. "I
do," he answered, in a low tone.

"Why?" the President demanded, with a quick look at his colleagues. He
spoke amid an irrepressible murmur of interest. The tale had been told
once, but it was a tale that bore telling.

"Because--I heard him plan his wife's death--and I thought it right,"
the boy stammered, terror growing in his eyes. "I wanted to save her.
I did not know. I did not think."

The President looked towards the king, but suddenly from an unexpected
quarter came an interruption. Madame rose trembling to her feet and
stood grasping the bar before her. Her face passed from white to red,
and red to white. Her eyes glittered through her tears. The woman
beside her would have held her back, but she would not be restrained.
"What is this?" she panted. "Does he say that my husband was--there?"

"Yes, madame, he does," the President answered indulgently.

"And that he came for poison--for me?"

"He says so, madame."

She looked at him for a moment wildly, then sank back on her stool and
began to sob. She had gone through so many emotions; love and death,
shame and fear, had so sported with her during the last few days that
she could taste nothing to the full now, neither sweet nor bitter. As
the dawning of life and hope had left her rather dazed than thankful,
so this stab, that a little earlier would have pierced her very
heartstrings, did but prick her. Afterwards the thankfulness and the
pain--and the healing--might come. But here in the presence of all
these people, where so much had happened to her, she could only sob
weakly.

The President turned again to the king. Louis nodded, and with a
painful effort--for he stammered terribly--spoke. "Who is th-this
lad?" he said. "Ask him."

The judge bowed and returned to the witness. "You call yourself Jean
de Bault?" he said somewhat roughly. The name, and especially the
particle, displeased him.

The boy assented.

"Who are you, then?"

Jehan opened his mouth to answer, but Father Bernard interposed. "Tell
His Majesty," he said, "what you told me."

After a moment's hesitation the boy complied, speaking fast, with his
face on his breast and a flushed cheek. Nevertheless, in the silence
every word reached the ear. "I am Jehan de Bault," he pattered in his
treble voice, "seigneur of I know not where, and lord of seventeen
lordships in the county of Perigord----" and so on, and so on, through
the quaint formula to which we have listened more than once.

Ninety-nine out of a hundred who heard him, heard him with incredulous
surprise, and took the tale for a mountebank's patter; though patter,
they acknowledged it was of a novel kind, aptly made and well spoken.
Two or three of the bolder laughed. There had been little to laugh at
before. The king moved restlessly in his chair, saying, "Pish! Wh-hat
is this rubbish? What is he s-saying?"

The President frowned, and taking his cue from the king, was about to
rebuke the boy sharply, when one who had not before spoken, but whose
voice in an instant produced silence among high and low, intervened.
"The tale rings true!" the Cardinal said, in low, suave accents. "But
there is no family of Bault in Perigord, is there?"

"With His Majesty's permission, no!" replied a bluff, hearty voice;
and therewith the elderly soldier who had come in with the king
advanced a pace to the side of his master's chair. "I am of Perigord,
and know, your Eminence," he continued. "More. Two months ago I saw
this lad--I recognise him now--at the fair of Fécamp. He was
differently dressed then, but he had the same tale, except that he did
not mention Perigord."

"S-someone has taught it him," said the king.

"Your Majesty is doubtless right," the President answered
obsequiously. Then to the boy he continued, "Speak, boy; who taught it
you?"

But Jehan only shook his head and looked puzzled. At last, being
pressed, he said, "At Bault, in Perigord."

"There is no such place!" M. de Bresly cried roundly.

Father Bernard looked distressed. He began to repent that he had led
the child to tell the tale; he began to fear that it might hurt
instead of helping. Perhaps after all he had been too credulous. But
again the Cardinal came to the rescue.

"Is there any family in Perigord can boast of three marshals, M. de
Bresly?" he asked, in his thin incisive tones.

"None that I know of. Several that can boast of two."

"The blood of Roland?"

M. de Bresly shrugged his shoulders. "It is common to all of us," he
said, smiling.

The great Cardinal smiled, too--a flickering, quickly-passing smile.
Then he leaned forward and fixed the boy with his fierce black eyes.
"What was your father's name?" he said.

Jehan shook his head, impotently, miserably.

"Where did you live?"

The same result. The king threw himself back and muttered, "It is no
good." The President moved in his seat. Some in the galleries began to
whisper.

But the Cardinal raised his hand imperiously. "Can you read?" he said.

"No," Jehan murmured.

"Then your arms?" The Cardinal spoke rapidly now, and his face was
growing hard. "They were over the gate, over the door, over the
fireplace. Think--look back--reflect. What were they?"

For a moment. Jehan stared at him in bewilderment, flinching under the
gaze of those piercing eyes. Then on a sudden the boy's face grew
crimson. He raised his hand eagerly. "_Or, on a mount vert!_" he cried
impetuously--and stopped. But presently, in a different voice, he
added slowly, "It was a tree--on a hill."

With a swift look of triumph the Cardinal turned to M. de Bresly.
"Now," he said, "that belongs to----"

The soldier nodded almost sulkily. "It is Madame de Vidoche's," he
said.

"And her name was----"

"Martinbault. Mademoiselle de Martinbault!"

A murmur of astonishment rose from every part of the court. For a
moment the King, the Cardinal, the President, M. de Bresly, all were
inaudible. The air seemed full of exclamations, questions, answers; it
rang with the words, "Bault--Martinbault!" Everywhere people rose to
see the boy, or craned forward and slipped with a clattering noise.
Etiquette, reverence, even the presence of the king, went for nothing
in the rush of excitement. It was long before the ushers could obtain
silence, or any get a hearing.

Then M. de Bresly, who looked as much excited as any, and as red in
the face, was found to be speaking. "Pardieu, sire, it may be so!" he
was heard to say. "It is true enough, as I now remember. A child was
lost in that family about eight years back. But it was at the time of
the Rochelle expedition; the province was full of trouble, and M. and
Madame de Martinbault were just dead; and little was made of it. All
the same, this may be the boy. Nay, it is a thousand to one he is!"

"What is he, then, to M--Madame de V--Vidoche?" the king asked, with
an effort. He was vastly excited--for him.

"A brother, sire," M. de Bresly answered.

That word pierced at last through the dulness which wrapped madame's
faculties, and had made her impervious to all that had gone before.
She rose slowly, listened, looked at the boy---looked with growing
wonder, like one awakening from a dream. Possibly in that moment the
later years fell from her, and she saw herself again a child--a tall,
lanky girl playing in the garden of the old château with a little
toddling boy who ran and lisped, beat her sturdily with fat, bare arms
or cuddled to her for kisses. For with a sudden gesture she stretched
out her hands, and cried in a clear voice, "Jean! Jean! It is little
Jean!"

                          *   *   *   *   *

It became the fashion--a fashion which lasted half a dozen years at
least--to call that Christmas the Martinbault Christmas; so loudly did
those who were present at that famous examination, and the discovery
which attended it, profess that it exceeded all the other amusements
of the year, not excepting even the great ball at the Palais Cardinal,
from which every lady carried off an _étrenne_ worth a year's
pin-money. The story became the rage. Those who had been present drove
their friends, who had not been so fortunate, to the verge of madness.
From the court the tale spread to the markets. Men made a broadsheet
of it, and sold it in the streets--in the Rue Touchet, and under the
gallows at Montfaucon, where the body of Solomon Nôtredame withered in
the spring rains. Had Madame de Vidoche and the child stayed in Paris,
it must have offended their ears ten times a day.


[Illustration: "A MAN HALF-NAKED ... CRAWLED ON TO THE HIGHROAD" (_p_.
212).]


But they did not. As soon as madame could be moved, she retired with
the boy to the old house four leagues from Perigueux, and there, in
the quiet land where the name of Martinbault ranked with the name of
the king, she sought to forget her married life. She took her maiden
title, and in the boy's breeding, in works of mercy, in a hundred
noble and fitting duties entirely to her taste, succeeded in finding
peace, and presently happiness. But one thing neither time, nor
change, nor in the event love, could erase from her mind; and that was
a deep-seated dread of the great city in which she had suffered so
much. She never returned to Paris.

About a year after the trial a man with crafty, foxy eyes came
wandering through Perigueux, with a monkey on his shoulder. He saw not
far from the road--as his evil-star would have it--an old château
standing low among trees. The place promised well, and he went to it
and began to perform before the servants in the courtyard. Presently
the lord of the house, a young boy, came out to see him.

More need not be said, save that an hour later a man, half naked,
covered with duckweed, and aching in every bone, crawled on to the
highroad, and went on his way in sadness--with his mouth full of
curses; and that for years afterwards a monkey, answering to the name
of Taras, teased the dogs, and plucked the ivy, and gambolled at will
on the great south terrace at Martinbault.




                               THE END.





                          *   *   *   *   *
Printed by Cassell & Company, Limited. La Belle Sauvage, London, E.C.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man in Black, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN BLACK ***

***** This file should be named 39295-8.txt or 39295-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39295/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's Notes from the Underground, by Feodor Dostoevsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes from the Underground

Author: Feodor Dostoevsky

Posting Date: September 13, 2008 [EBook #600]
Release Date: July, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.








Notes from the Underground

FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY





PART I

Underground*

     *The author of the diary and the diary itself
     are, of course, imaginary.  Nevertheless it is clear
     that such persons as the writer of these notes
     not only may, but positively must, exist in our
     society, when we consider the circumstances in
     the midst of which our society is formed.  I have
     tried to expose to the view of the public more
     distinctly than is commonly done, one of the
     characters of the recent past.  He is one of the
     representatives of a generation still living.  In this
     fragment, entitled "Underground," this person
     introduces himself and his views, and, as it were,
     tries to explain the causes owing to which he has
     made his appearance and was bound to make his
     appearance in our midst.  In the second fragment
     there are added the actual notes of this person
     concerning certain events in his life.--AUTHOR'S NOTE.



I

I am a sick man....  I am a spiteful man.  I am an unattractive man.  I
believe my liver is diseased.  However, I know nothing at all about my
disease, and do not know for certain what ails me.  I don't consult a
doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for medicine and
doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently so to
respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to be
superstitious, but I am superstitious).  No, I refuse to consult a
doctor from spite.  That you probably will not understand.  Well, I
understand it, though.  Of course, I can't explain who it is precisely
that I am mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well
aware that I cannot "pay out" the doctors by not consulting them; I
know better than anyone that by all this I am only injuring myself and
no one else.  But still, if I don't consult a doctor it is from spite.
My liver is bad, well--let it get worse!

I have been going on like that for a long time--twenty years.  Now I am
forty.  I used to be in the government service, but am no longer.  I
was a spiteful official.  I was rude and took pleasure in being so.  I
did not take bribes, you see, so I was bound to find a recompense in
that, at least.  (A poor jest, but I will not scratch it out.  I wrote
it thinking it would sound very witty; but now that I have seen myself
that I only wanted to show off in a despicable way, I will not scratch
it out on purpose!)

When petitioners used to come for information to the table at which I
sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and felt intense enjoyment when
I succeeded in making anybody unhappy.  I almost did succeed.  For the
most part they were all timid people--of course, they were petitioners.
But of the uppish ones there was one officer in particular I could not
endure.  He simply would not be humble, and clanked his sword in a
disgusting way.  I carried on a feud with him for eighteen months over
that sword.  At last I got the better of him.  He left off clanking it.
That happened in my youth, though.

But do you know, gentlemen, what was the chief point about my spite?
Why, the whole point, the real sting of it lay in the fact that
continually, even in the moment of the acutest spleen, I was inwardly
conscious with shame that I was not only not a spiteful but not even an
embittered man, that I was simply scaring sparrows at random and
amusing myself by it.  I might foam at the mouth, but bring me a doll
to play with, give me a cup of tea with sugar in it, and maybe I should
be appeased.  I might even be genuinely touched, though probably I
should grind my teeth at myself afterwards and lie awake at night with
shame for months after.  That was my way.

I was lying when I said just now that I was a spiteful official.  I was
lying from spite.  I was simply amusing myself with the petitioners and
with the officer, and in reality I never could become spiteful.  I was
conscious every moment in myself of many, very many elements absolutely
opposite to that.  I felt them positively swarming in me, these
opposite elements. I knew that they had been swarming in me all my life
and craving some outlet from me, but I would not let them, would not
let them, purposely would not let them come out.  They tormented me
till I was ashamed: they drove me to convulsions and--sickened me, at
last, how they sickened me!  Now, are not you fancying, gentlemen, that
I am expressing remorse for something now, that I am asking your
forgiveness for something?  I am sure you are fancying that ...
However, I assure you I do not care if you are....

It was not only that I could not become spiteful, I did not know how to
become anything; neither spiteful nor kind, neither a rascal nor an
honest man, neither a hero nor an insect.  Now, I am living out my life
in my corner, taunting myself with the spiteful and useless consolation
that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously, and it is
only the fool who becomes anything.  Yes, a man in the nineteenth
century must and morally ought to be pre-eminently a characterless
creature; a man of character, an active man is pre-eminently a limited
creature.  That is my conviction of forty years.  I am forty years old
now, and you know forty years is a whole lifetime; you know it is
extreme old age.  To live longer than forty years is bad manners, is
vulgar, immoral.  Who does live beyond forty?  Answer that, sincerely
and honestly I will tell you who do: fools and worthless fellows.  I
tell all old men that to their face, all these venerable old men, all
these silver-haired and reverend seniors!  I tell the whole world that
to its face!  I have a right to say so, for I shall go on living to
sixty myself.  To seventy!  To eighty! ...  Stay, let me take breath
...

You imagine no doubt, gentlemen, that I want to amuse you.  You are
mistaken in that, too.  I am by no means such a mirthful person as you
imagine, or as you may imagine; however, irritated by all this babble
(and I feel that you are irritated) you think fit to ask me who I
am--then my answer is, I am a collegiate assessor.  I was in the
service that I might have something to eat (and solely for that
reason), and when last year a distant relation left me six thousand
roubles in his will I immediately retired from the service and settled
down in my corner.  I used to live in this corner before, but now I
have settled down in it.  My room is a wretched, horrid one in the
outskirts of the town.  My servant is an old country-woman, ill-natured
from stupidity, and, moreover, there is always a nasty smell about her.
I am told that the Petersburg climate is bad for me, and that with my
small means it is very expensive to live in Petersburg.  I know all
that better than all these sage and experienced counsellors and
monitors....  But I am remaining in Petersburg; I am not going away
from Petersburg!  I am not going away because ... ech!  Why, it is
absolutely no matter whether I am going away or not going away.

But what can a decent man speak of with most pleasure?

Answer: Of himself.

Well, so I will talk about myself.



II

I want now to tell you, gentlemen, whether you care to hear it or not,
why I could not even become an insect.  I tell you solemnly, that I
have many times tried to become an insect.  But I was not equal even to
that.  I swear, gentlemen, that to be too conscious is an illness--a
real thorough-going illness.  For man's everyday needs, it would have
been quite enough to have the ordinary human consciousness, that is,
half or a quarter of the amount which falls to the lot of a cultivated
man of our unhappy nineteenth century, especially one who has the fatal
ill-luck to inhabit Petersburg, the most theoretical and intentional
town on the whole terrestrial globe.  (There are intentional and
unintentional towns.)  It would have been quite enough, for instance,
to have the consciousness by which all so-called direct persons and men
of action live.  I bet you think I am writing all this from
affectation, to be witty at the expense of men of action; and what is
more, that from ill-bred affectation, I am clanking a sword like my
officer.  But, gentlemen, whoever can pride himself on his diseases and
even swagger over them?

Though, after all, everyone does do that; people do pride themselves on
their diseases, and I do, may be, more than anyone.  We will not
dispute it; my contention was absurd.  But yet I am firmly persuaded
that a great deal of consciousness, every sort of consciousness, in
fact, is a disease.  I stick to that.  Let us leave that, too, for a
minute.  Tell me this: why does it happen that at the very, yes, at the
very moments when I am most capable of feeling every refinement of all
that is "sublime and beautiful," as they used to say at one time, it
would, as though of design, happen to me not only to feel but to do
such ugly things, such that ... Well, in short, actions that all,
perhaps, commit; but which, as though purposely, occurred to me at the
very time when I was most conscious that they ought not to be
committed.  The more conscious I was of goodness and of all that was
"sublime and beautiful," the more deeply I sank into my mire and the
more ready I was to sink in it altogether.  But the chief point was
that all this was, as it were, not accidental in me, but as though it
were bound to be so.  It was as though it were my most normal
condition, and not in the least disease or depravity, so that at last
all desire in me to struggle against this depravity passed.  It ended
by my almost believing (perhaps actually believing) that this was
perhaps my normal condition.  But at first, in the beginning, what
agonies I endured in that struggle!  I did not believe it was the same
with other people, and all my life I hid this fact about myself as a
secret.  I was ashamed (even now, perhaps, I am ashamed): I got to the
point of feeling a sort of secret abnormal, despicable enjoyment in
returning home to my corner on some disgusting Petersburg night,
acutely conscious that that day I had committed a loathsome action
again, that what was done could never be undone, and secretly, inwardly
gnawing, gnawing at myself for it, tearing and consuming myself till at
last the bitterness turned into a sort of shameful accursed sweetness,
and at last--into positive real enjoyment! Yes, into enjoyment, into
enjoyment!  I insist upon that.  I have spoken of this because I keep
wanting to know for a fact whether other people feel such enjoyment?  I
will explain; the enjoyment was just from the too intense consciousness
of one's own degradation; it was from feeling oneself that one had
reached the last barrier, that it was horrible, but that it could not
be otherwise; that there was no escape for you; that you never could
become a different man; that even if time and faith were still left you
to change into something different you would most likely not wish to
change; or if you did wish to, even then you would do nothing; because
perhaps in reality there was nothing for you to change into.

And the worst of it was, and the root of it all, that it was all in
accord with the normal fundamental laws of over-acute consciousness,
and with the inertia that was the direct result of those laws, and that
consequently one was not only unable to change but could do absolutely
nothing.  Thus it would follow, as the result of acute consciousness,
that one is not to blame in being a scoundrel; as though that were any
consolation to the scoundrel once he has come to realise that he
actually is a scoundrel.  But enough....  Ech, I have talked a lot of
nonsense, but what have I explained?  How is enjoyment in this to be
explained?  But I will explain it.  I will get to the bottom of it!
That is why I have taken up my pen....

I, for instance, have a great deal of AMOUR PROPRE.  I am as suspicious
and prone to take offence as a humpback or a dwarf.  But upon my word I
sometimes have had moments when if I had happened to be slapped in the
face I should, perhaps, have been positively glad of it.  I say, in
earnest, that I should probably have been able to discover even in that
a peculiar sort of enjoyment--the enjoyment, of course, of despair; but
in despair there are the most intense enjoyments, especially when one
is very acutely conscious of the hopelessness of one's position.  And
when one is slapped in the face--why then the consciousness of being
rubbed into a pulp would positively overwhelm one.  The worst of it is,
look at it which way one will, it still turns out that I was always the
most to blame in everything.  And what is most humiliating of all, to
blame for no fault of my own but, so to say, through the laws of
nature.  In the first place, to blame because I am cleverer than any of
the people surrounding me.  (I have always considered myself cleverer
than any of the people surrounding me, and sometimes, would you believe
it, have been positively ashamed of it.  At any rate, I have all my
life, as it were, turned my eyes away and never could look people
straight in the face.)  To blame, finally, because even if I had had
magnanimity, I should only have had more suffering from the sense of
its uselessness.  I should certainly have never been able to do
anything from being magnanimous--neither to forgive, for my assailant
would perhaps have slapped me from the laws of nature, and one cannot
forgive the laws of nature; nor to forget, for even if it were owing to
the laws of nature, it is insulting all the same.  Finally, even if I
had wanted to be anything but magnanimous, had desired on the contrary
to revenge myself on my assailant, I could not have revenged myself on
any one for anything because I should certainly never have made up my
mind to do anything, even if I had been able to.  Why should I not have
made up my mind?  About that in particular I want to say a few words.



III

With people who know how to revenge themselves and to stand up for
themselves in general, how is it done?  Why, when they are possessed,
let us suppose, by the feeling of revenge, then for the time there is
nothing else but that feeling left in their whole being.  Such a
gentleman simply dashes straight for his object like an infuriated bull
with its horns down, and nothing but a wall will stop him.  (By the
way: facing the wall, such gentlemen--that is, the "direct" persons and
men of action--are genuinely nonplussed.  For them a wall is not an
evasion, as for us people who think and consequently do nothing; it is
not an excuse for turning aside, an excuse for which we are always very
glad, though we scarcely believe in it ourselves, as a rule.  No, they
are nonplussed in all sincerity.  The wall has for them something
tranquillising, morally soothing, final--maybe even something
mysterious ... but of the wall later.)

Well, such a direct person I regard as the real normal man, as his
tender mother nature wished to see him when she graciously brought him
into being on the earth.  I envy such a man till I am green in the
face.  He is stupid.  I am not disputing that, but perhaps the normal
man should be stupid, how do you know?  Perhaps it is very beautiful,
in fact.  And I am the more persuaded of that suspicion, if one can
call it so, by the fact that if you take, for instance, the antithesis
of the normal man, that is, the man of acute consciousness, who has
come, of course, not out of the lap of nature but out of a retort (this
is almost mysticism, gentlemen, but I suspect this, too), this
retort-made man is sometimes so nonplussed in the presence of his
antithesis that with all his exaggerated consciousness he genuinely
thinks of himself as a mouse and not a man.  It may be an acutely
conscious mouse, yet it is a mouse, while the other is a man, and
therefore, et caetera, et caetera.  And the worst of it is, he himself,
his very own self, looks on himself as a mouse; no one asks him to do
so; and that is an important point.  Now let us look at this mouse in
action.  Let us suppose, for instance, that it feels insulted, too (and
it almost always does feel insulted), and wants to revenge itself, too.
There may even be a greater accumulation of spite in it than in L'HOMME
DE LA NATURE ET DE LA VERITE.  The base and nasty desire to vent that
spite on its assailant rankles perhaps even more nastily in it than in
L'HOMME DE LA NATURE ET DE LA VERITE.  For through his innate stupidity
the latter looks upon his revenge as justice pure and simple; while in
consequence of his acute consciousness the mouse does not believe in
the justice of it.  To come at last to the deed itself, to the very act
of revenge.  Apart from the one fundamental nastiness the luckless
mouse succeeds in creating around it so many other nastinesses in the
form of doubts and questions, adds to the one question so many
unsettled questions that there inevitably works up around it a sort of
fatal brew, a stinking mess, made up of its doubts, emotions, and of
the contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action who stand
solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing at it till their
healthy sides ache.  Of course the only thing left for it is to dismiss
all that with a wave of its paw, and, with a smile of assumed contempt
in which it does not even itself believe, creep ignominiously into its
mouse-hole.  There in its nasty, stinking, underground home our
insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes absorbed in
cold, malignant and, above all, everlasting spite.  For forty years
together it will remember its injury down to the smallest, most
ignominious details, and every time will add, of itself, details still
more ignominious, spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own
imagination.  It will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but yet it
will recall it all, it will go over and over every detail, it will
invent unheard of things against itself, pretending that those things
might happen, and will forgive nothing.  Maybe it will begin to revenge
itself, too, but, as it were, piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind
the stove, incognito, without believing either in its own right to
vengeance, or in the success of its revenge, knowing that from all its
efforts at revenge it will suffer a hundred times more than he on whom
it revenges itself, while he, I daresay, will not even scratch himself.
On its deathbed it will recall it all over again, with interest
accumulated over all the years and ...

But it is just in that cold, abominable half despair, half belief, in
that conscious burying oneself alive for grief in the underworld for
forty years, in that acutely recognised and yet partly doubtful
hopelessness of one's position, in that hell of unsatisfied desires
turned inward, in that fever of oscillations, of resolutions determined
for ever and repented of again a minute later--that the savour of that
strange enjoyment of which I have spoken lies.  It is so subtle, so
difficult of analysis, that persons who are a little limited, or even
simply persons of strong nerves, will not understand a single atom of
it.  "Possibly," you will add on your own account with a grin, "people
will not understand it either who have never received a slap in the
face," and in that way you will politely hint to me that I, too,
perhaps, have had the experience of a slap in the face in my life, and
so I speak as one who knows.  I bet that you are thinking that.  But
set your minds at rest, gentlemen, I have not received a slap in the
face, though it is absolutely a matter of indifference to me what you
may think about it. Possibly, I even regret, myself, that I have given
so few slaps in the face during my life.  But enough ... not another
word on that subject of such extreme interest to you.

I will continue calmly concerning persons with strong nerves who do not
understand a certain refinement of enjoyment.  Though in certain
circumstances these gentlemen bellow their loudest like bulls, though
this, let us suppose, does them the greatest credit, yet, as I have
said already, confronted with the impossible they subside at once.  The
impossible means the stone wall!  What stone wall?  Why, of course, the
laws of nature, the deductions of natural science, mathematics.  As
soon as they prove to you, for instance, that you are descended from a
monkey, then it is no use scowling, accept it for a fact.  When they
prove to you that in reality one drop of your own fat must be dearer to
you than a hundred thousand of your fellow-creatures, and that this
conclusion is the final solution of all so-called virtues and duties
and all such prejudices and fancies, then you have just to accept it,
there is no help for it, for twice two is a law of mathematics.  Just
try refuting it.

"Upon my word, they will shout at you, it is no use protesting: it is a
case of twice two makes four!  Nature does not ask your permission, she
has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws or
dislike them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently
all her conclusions.  A wall, you see, is a wall ... and so on, and so
on."

Merciful Heavens!  but what do I care for the laws of nature and
arithmetic, when, for some reason I dislike those laws and the fact
that twice two makes four?  Of course I cannot break through the wall
by battering my head against it if I really have not the strength to
knock it down, but I am not going to be reconciled to it simply because
it is a stone wall and I have not the strength.

As though such a stone wall really were a consolation, and really did
contain some word of conciliation, simply because it is as true as
twice two makes four.  Oh, absurdity of absurdities!  How much better
it is to understand it all, to recognise it all, all the
impossibilities and the stone wall; not to be reconciled to one of
those impossibilities and stone walls if it disgusts you to be
reconciled to it; by the way of the most inevitable, logical
combinations to reach the most revolting conclusions on the everlasting
theme, that even for the stone wall you are yourself somehow to blame,
though again it is as clear as day you are not to blame in the least,
and therefore grinding your teeth in silent impotence to sink into
luxurious inertia, brooding on the fact that there is no one even for
you to feel vindictive against, that you have not, and perhaps never
will have, an object for your spite, that it is a sleight of hand, a
bit of juggling, a card-sharper's trick, that it is simply a mess, no
knowing what and no knowing who, but in spite of all these
uncertainties and jugglings, still there is an ache in you, and the
more you do not know, the worse the ache.



IV

"Ha, ha, ha!  You will be finding enjoyment in toothache next," you
cry, with a laugh.

"Well, even in toothache there is enjoyment," I answer.  I had
toothache for a whole month and I know there is.  In that case, of
course, people are not spiteful in silence, but moan; but they are not
candid moans, they are malignant moans, and the malignancy is the whole
point.  The enjoyment of the sufferer finds expression in those moans;
if he did not feel enjoyment in them he would not moan.  It is a good
example, gentlemen, and I will develop it.  Those moans express in the
first place all the aimlessness of your pain, which is so humiliating
to your consciousness; the whole legal system of nature on which you
spit disdainfully, of course, but from which you suffer all the same
while she does not.  They express the consciousness that you have no
enemy to punish, but that you have pain; the consciousness that in
spite of all possible Wagenheims you are in complete slavery to your
teeth; that if someone wishes it, your teeth will leave off aching, and
if he does not, they will go on aching another three months; and that
finally if you are still contumacious and still protest, all that is
left you for your own gratification is to thrash yourself or beat your
wall with your fist as hard as you can, and absolutely nothing more.
Well, these mortal insults, these jeers on the part of someone unknown,
end at last in an enjoyment which sometimes reaches the highest degree
of voluptuousness.  I ask you, gentlemen, listen sometimes to the moans
of an educated man of the nineteenth century suffering from toothache,
on the second or third day of the attack, when he is beginning to moan,
not as he moaned on the first day, that is, not simply because he has
toothache, not just as any coarse peasant, but as a man affected by
progress and European civilisation, a man who is "divorced from the
soil and the national elements," as they express it now-a-days.  His
moans become nasty, disgustingly malignant, and go on for whole days
and nights.  And of course he knows himself that he is doing himself no
sort of good with his moans; he knows better than anyone that he is
only lacerating and harassing himself and others for nothing; he knows
that even the audience before whom he is making his efforts, and his
whole family, listen to him with loathing, do not put a ha'porth of
faith in him, and inwardly understand that he might moan differently,
more simply, without trills and flourishes, and that he is only amusing
himself like that from ill-humour, from malignancy.  Well, in all these
recognitions and disgraces it is that there lies a voluptuous pleasure.
As though he would say: "I am worrying you, I am lacerating your
hearts, I am keeping everyone in the house awake.  Well, stay awake
then, you, too, feel every minute that I have toothache.  I am not a
hero to you now, as I tried to seem before, but simply a nasty person,
an impostor.  Well, so be it, then!  I am very glad that you see
through me.  It is nasty for you to hear my despicable moans: well, let
it be nasty; here I will let you have a nastier flourish in a
minute...."  You do not understand even now, gentlemen?  No, it seems
our  development and our consciousness must go further to understand
all the intricacies of this pleasure.  You laugh?  Delighted.  My
jests, gentlemen, are of course in bad taste, jerky, involved, lacking
self-confidence.  But of course that is because I do not respect
myself.  Can a man of perception respect himself at all?



V

Come, can a man who attempts to find enjoyment in the very feeling of
his own degradation possibly have a spark of respect for himself?  I am
not saying this now from any mawkish kind of remorse.  And, indeed, I
could never endure saying, "Forgive me, Papa, I won't do it again," not
because I am incapable of saying that--on the contrary, perhaps just
because I have been too capable of it, and in what a way, too.  As
though of design I used to get into trouble in cases when I was not to
blame in any way.  That was the nastiest part of it.  At the same time
I was genuinely touched and penitent, I used to shed tears and, of
course, deceived myself, though I was not acting in the least and there
was a sick feeling in my heart at the time....  For that one could not
blame even the laws of nature, though the laws of nature have
continually all my life offended me more than anything.  It is
loathsome to remember it all, but it was loathsome even then.  Of
course, a minute or so later I would realise wrathfully that it was all
a lie, a revolting lie, an affected lie, that is, all this penitence,
this emotion, these vows of reform.  You will ask why did I worry
myself with such antics: answer, because it was very dull to sit with
one's hands folded, and so one began cutting capers.  That is really
it.  Observe yourselves more carefully, gentlemen, then you will
understand that it is so. I invented adventures for myself and made up
a life, so as at least to live in some way.  How many times it has
happened to me--well, for instance, to take offence simply on purpose,
for nothing; and one knows oneself, of course, that one is offended at
nothing; that one is putting it on, but yet one brings oneself at last
to the point of being really offended. All my life I have had an
impulse to play such pranks, so that in the end I could not control it
in myself.  Another time, twice, in fact, I tried hard to be in love.
I suffered, too, gentlemen, I assure you.  In the depth of my heart
there was no faith in my suffering, only a faint stir of mockery, but
yet I did suffer, and in the real, orthodox way; I was jealous, beside
myself ... and it was all from ENNUI, gentlemen, all from ENNUI;
inertia overcame me.  You know the direct, legitimate fruit of
consciousness is inertia, that is, conscious
sitting-with-the-hands-folded.  I have referred to this already.  I
repeat, I repeat with emphasis: all "direct" persons and men of action
are active just because they are stupid and limited.  How explain that?
I will tell you: in consequence of their limitation they take immediate
and secondary causes for primary ones, and in that way persuade
themselves more quickly and easily than other people do that they have
found an infallible foundation for their activity, and their minds are
at ease and you know that is the chief thing.  To begin to act, you
know, you must first have your mind completely at ease and no trace of
doubt left in it.  Why, how am I, for example, to set my mind at rest?
Where are the primary causes on which I am to build?  Where are my
foundations?  Where am I to get them from?  I exercise myself in
reflection, and consequently with me every primary cause at once draws
after itself another still more primary, and so on to infinity.  That
is just the essence of every sort of consciousness and reflection.  It
must be a case of the laws of nature again.  What is the result of it
in the end?  Why, just the same.  Remember I spoke just now of
vengeance.  (I am sure you did not take it in.)  I said that a man
revenges himself because he sees justice in it. Therefore he has found
a primary cause, that is, justice.  And so he is at rest on all sides,
and consequently he carries out his revenge calmly and successfully,
being persuaded that he is doing a just and honest thing.  But I see no
justice in it, I find no sort of virtue in it either, and consequently
if I attempt to revenge myself, it is only out of spite.  Spite, of
course, might overcome everything, all my doubts, and so might serve
quite successfully in place of a primary cause, precisely because it is
not a cause.  But what is to be done if I have not even spite (I began
with that just now, you know).  In consequence again of those accursed
laws of consciousness, anger in me is subject to chemical
disintegration.  You look into it, the object flies off into air, your
reasons evaporate, the criminal is not to be found, the wrong becomes
not a wrong but a phantom, something like the toothache, for which no
one is to blame, and consequently there is only the same outlet left
again--that is, to beat the wall as hard as you can.  So you give it up
with a wave of the hand because you have not found a fundamental cause.
And try letting yourself be carried away by your feelings, blindly,
without reflection, without a primary cause, repelling consciousness at
least for a time; hate or love, if only not to sit with your hands
folded.  The day after tomorrow, at the latest, you will begin
despising yourself for having knowingly deceived yourself.  Result: a
soap-bubble and inertia.  Oh, gentlemen, do you know, perhaps I
consider myself an intelligent man, only because all my life I have
been able neither to begin nor to finish anything.  Granted I am a
babbler, a harmless vexatious babbler, like all of us.  But what is to
be done if the direct and sole vocation of every intelligent man is
babble, that is, the intentional pouring of water through a sieve?



VI

Oh, if I had done nothing simply from laziness!  Heavens, how I should
have respected myself, then.  I should have respected myself because I
should at least have been capable of being lazy; there would at least
have been one quality, as it were, positive in me, in which I could
have believed myself.  Question:  What is he?  Answer:  A sluggard; how
very pleasant it would have been to hear that of oneself!  It would
mean that I was positively defined, it would mean that there was
something to say about me. "Sluggard"--why, it is a calling and
vocation, it is a career.  Do not jest, it is so.  I should then be a
member of the best club by right, and should find my occupation in
continually respecting myself.  I knew a gentleman who prided himself
all his life on being a connoisseur of Lafitte.  He considered this as
his positive virtue, and never doubted himself.  He died, not simply
with a tranquil, but with a triumphant conscience, and he was quite
right, too.  Then I should have chosen a career for myself, I should
have been a sluggard and a glutton, not a simple one, but, for
instance, one with sympathies for everything sublime and beautiful.
How do you like that?  I have long had visions of it.  That "sublime
and beautiful" weighs heavily on my mind at forty But that is at forty;
then--oh, then it would have been different!  I should have found for
myself a form of activity in keeping with it, to be precise, drinking
to the health of everything "sublime and beautiful."  I should have
snatched at every opportunity to drop a tear into my glass and then to
drain it to all that is "sublime and beautiful."  I should then have
turned everything into the sublime and the beautiful; in the nastiest,
unquestionable trash, I should have sought out the sublime and the
beautiful.  I should have exuded tears like a wet sponge.  An artist,
for instance, paints a picture worthy of Gay.  At once I drink to the
health of the artist who painted the picture worthy of Gay, because I
love all that is "sublime and beautiful."  An author has written AS YOU
WILL: at once I drink to the health of "anyone you will" because I love
all that is "sublime and beautiful."

I should claim respect for doing so.  I should persecute anyone who
would not show me respect.  I should live at ease, I should die with
dignity, why, it is charming, perfectly charming!  And what a good
round belly I should have grown, what a treble chin I should have
established, what a ruby nose I should have coloured for myself, so
that everyone would have said, looking at me: "Here is an asset!  Here
is something real and solid!"  And, say what you like, it is very
agreeable to hear such remarks about oneself in this negative age.



VII

But these are all golden dreams.  Oh, tell me, who was it first
announced, who was it first proclaimed, that man only does nasty things
because he does not know his own interests; and that if he were
enlightened, if his eyes were opened to his real normal interests, man
would at once cease to do nasty things, would at once become good and
noble because, being enlightened and understanding his real advantage,
he would see his own advantage in the good and nothing else, and we all
know that not one man can, consciously, act against his own interests,
consequently, so to say, through necessity, he would begin doing good?
Oh, the babe!  Oh, the pure, innocent child!  Why, in the first place,
when in all these thousands of years has there been a time when man has
acted only from his own interest?  What is to be done with the millions
of facts that bear witness that men, CONSCIOUSLY, that is fully
understanding their real interests, have left them in the background
and have rushed headlong on another path, to meet peril and danger,
compelled to this course by nobody and by nothing, but, as it were,
simply disliking the beaten track, and have obstinately, wilfully,
struck out another difficult, absurd way, seeking it almost in the
darkness.  So, I suppose, this obstinacy and perversity were pleasanter
to them than any advantage....  Advantage! What is advantage?  And will
you take it upon yourself to define with perfect accuracy in what the
advantage of man consists?  And what if it so happens that a man's
advantage, SOMETIMES, not only may, but even must, consist in his
desiring in certain cases what is harmful to himself and not
advantageous.  And if so, if there can be such a case, the whole
principle falls into dust.  What do you think--are there such cases?
You laugh; laugh away, gentlemen, but only answer me: have man's
advantages been reckoned up with perfect certainty?  Are there not some
which not only have not been included but cannot possibly be included
under any classification?  You see, you gentlemen have, to the best of
my knowledge, taken your whole register of human advantages from the
averages of statistical figures and politico-economical formulas.  Your
advantages are prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace--and so on, and so
on. So that the man who should, for instance, go openly and knowingly
in opposition to all that list would to your thinking, and indeed mine,
too, of course, be an obscurantist or an absolute madman: would not he?
But, you know, this is what is surprising: why does it so happen that
all these statisticians, sages and lovers of humanity, when they reckon
up human advantages invariably leave out one?  They don't even take it
into their reckoning in the form in which it should be taken, and the
whole reckoning depends upon that.  It would be no greater matter, they
would simply have to take it, this advantage, and add it to the list.
But the trouble is, that this strange advantage does not fall under any
classification and is not in place in any list.  I have a friend for
instance ...  Ech! gentlemen, but of course he is your friend, too; and
indeed there is no one, no one to whom he is not a friend!  When he
prepares for any undertaking this gentleman immediately explains to
you, elegantly and clearly, exactly how he must act in accordance with
the laws of reason and truth.  What is more, he will talk to you with
excitement and passion of the true normal interests of man; with irony
he will upbraid the short-sighted fools who do not understand their own
interests, nor the true significance of virtue; and, within a quarter
of an hour, without any sudden outside provocation, but simply through
something inside him which is stronger than all his interests, he will
go off on quite a different tack--that is, act in direct opposition to
what he has just been saying about himself, in opposition to the laws
of reason, in opposition to his own advantage, in fact in opposition to
everything ...  I warn you that my friend is a compound personality and
therefore it is difficult to blame him as an individual.  The fact is,
gentlemen, it seems there must really exist something that is dearer to
almost every man than his greatest advantages, or (not to be illogical)
there is a most advantageous advantage (the very one omitted of which
we spoke just now) which is more important and more advantageous than
all other advantages, for the sake of which a man if necessary is ready
to act in opposition to all laws; that is, in opposition to reason,
honour, peace, prosperity--in fact, in opposition to all those
excellent and useful things if only he can attain that fundamental,
most advantageous advantage which is dearer to him than all.  "Yes, but
it's advantage all the same," you will retort.  But excuse me, I'll
make the point clear, and it is not a case of playing upon words. What
matters is, that this advantage is remarkable from the very fact that
it breaks down all our classifications, and continually shatters every
system constructed by lovers of mankind for the benefit of mankind.  In
fact, it upsets everything.  But before I mention this advantage to
you, I want to compromise myself personally, and therefore I boldly
declare that all these fine systems, all these theories for explaining
to mankind their real normal interests, in order that inevitably
striving to pursue these interests they may at once become good and
noble--are, in my opinion, so far, mere logical exercises!  Yes,
logical exercises.  Why, to maintain this theory of the regeneration of
mankind by means of the pursuit of his own advantage is to my mind
almost the same thing ... as to affirm, for instance, following Buckle,
that through civilisation mankind becomes softer, and consequently less
bloodthirsty and less fitted for warfare.  Logically it does seem to
follow from his arguments. But man has such a predilection for systems
and abstract deductions that he is ready to distort the truth
intentionally, he is ready to deny the evidence of his senses only to
justify his logic.  I take this example because it is the most glaring
instance of it.  Only look about you: blood is being spilt in streams,
and in the merriest way, as though it were champagne.  Take the whole
of the nineteenth century in which Buckle lived.  Take Napoleon--the
Great and also the present one.  Take North America--the eternal union.
Take the farce of Schleswig-Holstein.... And what is it that
civilisation softens in us?  The only gain of civilisation for mankind
is the greater capacity for variety of sensations--and absolutely
nothing more.  And through the development of this many-sidedness man
may come to finding enjoyment in bloodshed.  In fact, this has already
happened to him.  Have you noticed that it is the most civilised
gentlemen who have been the subtlest slaughterers, to whom the Attilas
and Stenka Razins could not hold a candle, and if they are not so
conspicuous as the Attilas and Stenka Razins it is simply because they
are so often met with, are so ordinary and have become so familiar to
us.  In any case civilisation has made mankind if not more
bloodthirsty, at least more vilely, more loathsomely bloodthirsty.  In
old days he saw justice in bloodshed and with his conscience at peace
exterminated those he thought proper.  Now we do think bloodshed
abominable and yet we engage in this abomination, and with more energy
than ever. Which is worse?  Decide that for yourselves.  They say that
Cleopatra (excuse an instance from Roman history) was fond of sticking
gold pins into her slave-girls' breasts and derived gratification from
their screams and writhings.  You will say that that was in the
comparatively barbarous times; that these are barbarous times too,
because also, comparatively speaking, pins are stuck in even now; that
though man has now learned to see more clearly than in barbarous ages,
he is still far from having learnt to act as reason and science would
dictate.  But yet you are fully convinced that he will be sure to learn
when he gets rid of certain old bad habits, and when common sense and
science have completely re-educated human nature and turned it in a
normal direction.  You are confident that then man will cease from
INTENTIONAL error and will, so to say, be compelled not to want to set
his will against his normal interests. That is not all; then, you say,
science itself will teach man (though to my mind it's a superfluous
luxury) that he never has really had any caprice or will of his own,
and that he himself is something of the nature of a piano-key or the
stop of an organ, and that there are, besides, things called the laws
of nature; so that everything he does is not done by his willing it,
but is done of itself, by the laws of nature.  Consequently we have
only to discover these laws of nature, and man will no longer have to
answer for his actions and life will become exceedingly easy for him.
All human actions will then, of course, be tabulated according to these
laws, mathematically, like tables of logarithms up to 108,000, and
entered in an index; or, better still, there would be published certain
edifying works of the nature of encyclopaedic lexicons, in which
everything will be so clearly calculated and explained that there will
be no more incidents or adventures in the world.

Then--this is all what you say--new economic relations will be
established, all ready-made and worked out with mathematical
exactitude, so that every possible question will vanish in the
twinkling of an eye, simply because every possible answer to it will be
provided.  Then the "Palace of Crystal" will be built.  Then ...  In
fact, those will be halcyon days.  Of course there is no guaranteeing
(this is my comment) that it will not be, for instance, frightfully
dull then (for what will one have to do when everything will be
calculated and tabulated), but on the other hand everything will be
extraordinarily rational.  Of course boredom may lead you to anything.
It is boredom sets one sticking golden pins into people, but all that
would not matter.  What is bad (this is my comment again) is that I
dare say people will be thankful for the gold pins then.  Man is
stupid, you know, phenomenally stupid; or rather he is not at all
stupid, but he is so ungrateful that you could not find another like
him in all creation.  I, for instance, would not be in the least
surprised if all of a sudden, A PROPOS of nothing, in the midst of
general prosperity a gentleman with an ignoble, or rather with a
reactionary and ironical, countenance were to arise and, putting his
arms akimbo, say to us all: "I say, gentleman, hadn't we better kick
over the whole show and scatter rationalism to the winds, simply to
send these logarithms to the devil, and to enable us to live once more
at our own sweet foolish will!" That again would not matter, but what
is annoying is that he would be sure to find followers--such is the
nature of man.  And all that for the most foolish reason, which, one
would think, was hardly worth mentioning: that is, that man everywhere
and at all times, whoever he may be, has preferred to act as he chose
and not in the least as his reason and advantage dictated.  And one may
choose what is contrary to one's own interests, and sometimes one
POSITIVELY OUGHT (that is my idea).  One's own free unfettered choice,
one's own caprice, however wild it may be, one's own fancy worked up at
times to frenzy--is that very "most advantageous advantage" which we
have overlooked, which comes under no classification and against which
all systems and theories are continually being shattered to atoms.  And
how do these wiseacres know that man wants a normal, a virtuous choice?
What has made them conceive that man must want a rationally
advantageous choice?  What man wants is simply INDEPENDENT choice,
whatever that independence may cost and wherever it may lead.  And
choice, of course, the devil only knows what choice.



VIII

"Ha! ha! ha!  But you know there is no such thing as choice in reality,
say what you like," you will interpose with a chuckle.  "Science has
succeeded in so far analysing man that we know already that choice and
what is called freedom of will is nothing else than--"

Stay, gentlemen, I meant to begin with that myself I confess, I was
rather frightened.  I was just going to say that the devil only knows
what choice depends on, and that perhaps that was a very good thing,
but I remembered the teaching of science ... and pulled myself up.  And
here you have begun upon it.  Indeed, if there really is some day
discovered a formula for all our desires and caprices--that is, an
explanation of what they depend upon, by what laws they arise, how they
develop, what they are aiming at in one case and in another and so on,
that is a real mathematical formula--then, most likely, man will at
once cease to feel desire, indeed, he will be certain to.  For who
would want to choose by rule?  Besides, he will at once be transformed
from a human being into an organ-stop or something of the sort; for
what is a man without desires, without free will and without choice, if
not a stop in an organ?  What do you think?  Let us reckon the
chances--can such a thing happen or not?

"H'm!" you decide.  "Our choice is usually mistaken from a false view
of our advantage.  We sometimes choose absolute nonsense because in our
foolishness we see in that nonsense the easiest means for attaining a
supposed advantage.  But when all that is explained and worked out on
paper (which is perfectly possible, for it is contemptible and
senseless to suppose that some laws of nature man will never
understand), then certainly so-called desires will no longer exist.
For if a desire should come into conflict with reason we shall then
reason and not desire, because it will be impossible retaining our
reason to be SENSELESS in our desires, and in that way knowingly act
against reason and desire to injure ourselves. And as all choice and
reasoning can be really calculated--because there will some day be
discovered the laws of our so-called free will--so, joking apart, there
may one day be something like a table constructed of them, so that we
really shall choose in accordance with it.  If, for instance, some day
they calculate and prove to me that I made a long nose at someone
because I could not help making a long nose at him and that I had to do
it in that particular way, what FREEDOM is left me, especially if I am
a learned man and have taken my degree somewhere?  Then I should be
able to calculate my whole life for thirty years beforehand.  In short,
if this could be arranged there would be nothing left for us to do;
anyway, we should have to understand that.  And, in fact, we ought
unwearyingly to repeat to ourselves that at such and such a time and in
such and such circumstances nature does not ask our leave; that we have
got to take her as she is and not fashion her to suit our fancy, and if
we really aspire to formulas and tables of rules, and well, even ... to
the chemical retort, there's no help for it, we must accept the retort
too, or else it will be accepted without our consent...."

Yes, but here I come to a stop!  Gentlemen, you must excuse me for
being over-philosophical; it's the result of forty years underground!
Allow me to indulge my fancy.  You see, gentlemen, reason is an
excellent thing, there's no disputing that, but reason is nothing but
reason and satisfies only the rational side of man's nature, while will
is a manifestation of the whole life, that is, of the whole human life
including reason and all the impulses. And although our life, in this
manifestation of it, is often worthless, yet it is life and not simply
