here presupposed, when worshipping "the beast and his image" is demanded
of the saints by the earthly ruler (Domitian), and the overthrow of the
seven-hilled city by one of its own rulers in league with lesser powers
is looked forward to as about to avenge the sufferings inflicted on the
Jews. As regards this hope of the overthrow of Rome, we know that the
legend of Nero's prospective return at the head of hosts of Parthian
enemies to recapture his empire gained currency in Asia Minor in
Domitian's reign, and this legend is certainly developed in Rev. xiii.
and xvii. On the other hand, the author, if he ever came to Asia, did
not cease to be a Palestinian Jew. He operates exclusively (after iv. 1)
with the materials and interests of Jewish and Jewish-Christian
apocalypse. He has no interest whatever in the churches of Asia. He does
not betray by one syllable a knowledge even of their existence, to say
nothing of their dangers, their heresies, their temptations. He does
make it abundantly clear that he is a Christian prophet (x. 7-11), and
(to us) almost equally clear that he is _not_ one of the twelve
apostles whose names he sees written on the foundation-stones of the New
Jerusalem (xxi. 14). But since his prophecy, with all its heterogeneous
elements had to do with the final triumph of Messiah, and the
establishment of His kingdom, after the overthrow of the power of
Satan--since it depicted "the time of the dead to be judged, and the
time to give their reward to thy servants the prophets, and to the
saints and to them that fear thy name," it could not fail to be welcomed
by orthodox Christians in (proconsular) Asia. For the churches of Asia
were engaged at this time in a vigorous struggle against the heretical
deniers of the resurrection and judgment. Only, a mere anonymous
prophecy from Palestine could not obtain any authoritative currency in
Asia. To be accepted, even among the orthodox, some name of apostolic
weight must be attached to it, as we see in the case of the two Epistles
of Peter and those of James and Jude. The Epistles of the Spirit to the
churches are, then, as truly "letters of commendation" as though they
introduced a living prophet and not merely a written prophecy. The John
whom they present is not called an apostle for the very simple reason
that the visions themselves everywhere refer to their recipient as a
'prophet.' The author of the prologue and epilogue does not disregard
the language of his material. As we have seen, he carefully weaves its
phraseology into the 'letters.' So with his insertion of the name
"John." It occurs nowhere but in i. 1 f., 4, 9 and xxii. 8 f. All
these passages, but especially xxii. 8 f., are based upon xix. 9_b_,
10, adding nothing to the representation but the name "John" and the
location "Patmos." In fact, xxii. 6-9 reproduces xix. 9 f., for the
most part verbatim, although it is clearly insupposable that the seer of
the former passage should represent himself as offering a _second_ time
to worship the angel, and as receiving _again_ exactly the same rebuke
he had received so shortly before. He who calls himself "John" in xxii.
8 is, therefore, _not_ the prophet of xix. 10. The epilogue itself has
apparently received successive supplements, and the prologue its prefix;
but he who inserts the name John has done so with caution. He may not
have intended to leave open the ambiguity found by Dionysius and
Eusebius between the Apostle and the Elder, as a refuge in case of
accusation, but he has at least been careful not to transgress the
limits of the text he reproduces. The seer spoke of himself as a
"_prophet_" writing from the midst of great _tribulation_, about the
_kingdom_ to follow to those that _endured_. He had said that he
received "true _words of God_" from an _angel_ who declared "I am a
fellow _servant_ with thee and with thy _brethren_ that hold _the
testimony of Jesus_" (_i. e._ the confession of martyrdom). The
prologue, accordingly, describes "John" as a _servant_ of Jesus, who
received from an _angel_ the _word of God_ and _the testimony of Jesus_
(i. 1 f.). He is a _brother_ and partaker in the _tribulation_ and
_kingdom_ and _endurance_ which are in Jesus. When he comes to Asia it
is "for the _word of God_ and _the testimony of Jesus_." The spot whence
he issues his prophetic message is not located in Ephesus, or in any
city where the residents could say, "But the Apostle John was never
among us." He resides temporarily (as a prisoner in the quarries?) in
the unfrequented island of Patmos. Thence he could be supposed to see
"in the Spirit" the condition of affairs in the churches of Asia without
inconvenient questions as to when, and how, and why.

    Footnote 26: Note the addition of an "eighth" emperor in ver. 11.

We may think, then, of this book of 'prophecy' as brought forth in the
vicinity of Ephesus near "the end of the reign of Domitian" (95). But
only the enclosing letters to the churches, and the epilogue
guaranteeing the contents, originate here at this time. The
'prophecies,' occupied as they are exclusively with the rivalry of
Jerusalem and Rome, and the judgment to be executed for the former upon
her ruthless adversary, bear unmistakable marks of their Palestinian
origin, not only in the historical and geographic situations
presupposed, but in the "defiant" Hebraisms of the language, and the
avowed translations from "the Hebrew." They are an importation from
Palestine like "the sound words, even the words of the Lord Jesus"
referred to in the Pastorals. The churches of Asia are feeling the need
of apostolic authority against the deniers of the resurrection and the
judgment, as much as against the perverters of the Lord's words. Such
centres as the homes of the prophesying daughters of Philip at Ephesus
and Hierapolis were even more abundantly competent to supply this demand
than the other. Agabus will not have been the only Judæan prophet who
visited them, especially after the "great tribulation" which befell
"those in Judæa." There is nothing foreign to the habit of the times,
even in Christian circles, if nameless 'prophecies' from such a source
are translated, edited, and given out under cover of commendatory
epistles written in the name of "John" at a time when John had indeed
partaken both of the tribulation and of the kingdom of Jesus. They would
hardly have obtained currency had they not been attributed to an
apostle; for a denial of the apostolicity of this book has always
deprived it of authority.

On the other hand, the actual (Palestinian) prophet has no such exalted
opinion of himself as of those whose names he sees written on the
foundation of the walls of the New Jerusalem (xxi. 14). He is not an
apostle and does not claim to be. He shows not the faintest trace of any
association with the earthly Jesus, and indeed displays a
vindictiveness toward the enemies of Israel that has more of the spirit
of the imprecatory psalms than the spirit of Jesus. He thinks of Jesus
as a king and judge bestowing heavenly rewards upon the martyrs in a
manner quite inconsistent with his rebuke of James and John (Mark x.
40). It is a far cry indeed from this to apostleship and personal
intimacy with Jesus.

The chief value of Revelation to the student of Christian origins is
that by means of its clearly determinable date (Ephesus, 93-95) he can
place himself at a point of vantage whence to look not only around him
at the conditions of the Pauline churches as depicted in the letters,
vexed with growing Gnostic heresy and moral laxity, but also both
backward and forward. The backward glance shows Palestine emerging from
the horrors of the Jewish war, filled with bitterness against Rome, held
down under hateful tyranny and longing for vengeance upon the despot
with his "names of blasphemy" and his demands of worship for "the image
of the beast" (emperor-worship). Here Jewish apocalyptic (as in 2nd
Esdras) and Christian 'prophecy' are closely in accord. Indeed a
considerable part of the material of Rev. iv.-xxi., especially in chh.
xi.-xii. is ultimately of Jewish rather than Christian origin. What the
development of Christian 'prophecy' was in Palestine from apostolic
times until the scattering of the church of "the apostles and elders"
after the war of Bar Cocheba (135), we can only infer from the kindred
Jewish apocalypses and the chiliastic "traditions of the Elders" quoted
by Irenæus from Papias. A forward look from our vantage point in Ephesus
_c._ A.D. 95, shows the effects of the Palestinian importation extending
down from generation to generation, first in the long chiliastic
controversy against the Doketic Gnostics, including Montanist
'prophecy'; secondly, in the growth of a claim to apostolic succession
from John.

(1) In the chiliastic controversy for a century the chief bones of
contention are the (non-Pauline) doctrine of the resurrection of the
_flesh_ (so the Apostles' Creed and the second-century fathers), and
that of a visible reign of Christ for a thousand years in Jerusalem. The
new form of resurrection-gospel which at about this time begins to take
the place of the apostolic of 1st Cor. xv. 3-11, centering upon the
emptiness of the sepulchre and the tangibility and food-consuming
functions of Jesus' resurrection body, instead of the "manifestations"
to the apostles, is characteristic of this struggle against the Greek
disposition to spiritualize. Luke and Ignatius represent the attitude of
the orthodox, Ignatius' opponents that of those who denied that Jesus
was "in the flesh after his resurrection." Revelation, like the
"traditions of the Elders," champions the visible kingdom of Messiah in
Jerusalem.

(2) In the effort for apostolic authority the writings which came
ultimately to represent Asian orthodoxy have all been brought under the
name and authority of the Apostle John, although for many decades after
the appearance of Revelation, Paul, and not John, remains the apostolic
authority to which appeal is made, and although the writings themselves
were originally anonymous. There was, indeed, a contributory cause for
the growth of this tradition in the accidental circumstance that a
Palestinian Elder from whom Papias derived indirect, and Polycarp in all
probability direct, traditions, bore also the name of John, and survived
until A.D. 117. Still, the main reason why this particular apostolic
name was ultimately placed over the Gospel and Epistles of Ephesian
Christendom, can only have been its previous adoption to cover the
compilation of Palestinian 'prophecies' of A.D. 95.




PART IV

THE LITERATURE OF THE THEOLOGIAN


CHAPTER IX

THE SPIRITUAL GOSPEL AND EPISTLES


Asia, as we have come to know it through a succession of writings dating
from Colossians-Ephesians (_c._ 62) down to Papias (145), had come to be
the chief scene of mutual reaction between 'apostolic' and Pauline
Christianity at the close of the first century. Here at Ephesus had been
the great headquarters of Paul's missionary activity. Here he had
reasoned daily in the school of one Tyrannus, a philosopher, and had
found "many adversaries." Here he had encountered the "strolling Jews,
exorcists," and had secured the destruction of an immense mass of books
of magic. Here, according to Acts, he predicted the inroads of heresy
after his "departure," and here the succeeding literature abundantly
witnesses the fulfilment of the prediction. Ephesians and Colossians
begin the series, the Pastoral Epistles (_c._ 90) continue it. Then
follow the 'letters to the churches' of Revelation (95) and the
Ignatian Epistles (110-117), not to mention those whose origin is
uncertain, such as Jude and 2nd Peter.

The Pastorals already make it apparent that even the Pauline churches
are not exempt from the inevitable tendency of the age to fall back upon
authority. The very sublimity of Paul's consciousness of apostolic
inspiration made it the harder for the next generation to assert any for
itself. Moreover heresy was growing apace. If even the outward pressure
of persecution tended to drive the churches together in brotherly
sympathy, still more indispensable would appear the need of traditional
standards to maintain the "type of sound doctrine," "the faith once for
all delivered to the saints." Without such it would be impossible to
check the individualism of errorists who took Paul's sense of personal
inspiration and mystical insight as their model, _without_ Paul's
sobriety of critical control under the standard of "the law of Christ."
It is no surprise, then, to find even at the headquarters of Paulinism
early in the second century a sweeping tendency to react toward the
'apostolic' standards. In particular, as Gnostic exaggeration of the
Pauline mysticism led continually further toward disregard of the
dictates of common morality, and a wider divergence from the Jewish
conceptions of the world to come, it was natural that men like Polycarp
and Papias should turn to the Matthæan and Petrine tradition of the
Lord's oracles, and to the Johannine 'prophecies' regarding the
resurrection and judgment.

Had nothing intervened between Gnostics and reactionaries the most vital
elements of Paul's gospel might well have disappeared, even at this
great headquarters of Paulinism. The Doketists, with their exaggerated
Hellenistic mysticism, were certainly not the true successors of Paul.
They showed an almost contemptuous disregard for the historic Jesus, a
one-sided aim at personal redemption, by mystic union of the individual
soul with the Christ-spirit, to the disregard of "the law of Christ,"
even in some cases of common morality. Paul was characterized by a
splendid loyalty to personal purity, to the social ideal of the Kingdom,
and to the unity of the brotherhood in the spirit of reciprocal service.
On the other hand men like the author of the Pastoral Epistles, Ignatius
and Polycarp, with their almost panic-stricken resort to the authority
of the past, were not perpetuating the true spirit of the great Apostle.
Their reliance was on ecclesiastical discipline, concrete and massive
miracle in the story of Jesus, particularly on the point of the
bodily--or, as they would have said, the "fleshly"--resurrection. Their
conception of his recorded "words," made of them a fixed, superhuman
standard and rule, a "new law." Teachers of this type, much as they
desired and believed themselves to be perpetuating the "sacred deposit"
of Paul, were in reality conserving its form and missing its spirit.
Such men would gladly "turn to the tradition handed down," of the
Matthæan Sayings, and the Petrine Story. But in the former they would
not find reflections of the sense of Son ship. They would find only a
supplementary Law, a new and higher set of rules. In the story they
would not discover the Pauline view of the pre-existent divine Wisdom
tabernacling in man, producing a second Adam, as elder brother of a new
race, the children and heirs of God. They would take the mysticism of
Paul and bring it down to the level of the man in the street. Jesus
would be to them either a completely superhuman man, approximating the
heathen demi-god, a divinity incognito; or else a man so endowed with
"the whole fountain of the Spirit" as to exercise perpetually and
uninterruptedly all its miraculous functions. The story of the cross
would be hidden behind the prodigies.

Least of all could the importation of apocalyptic prophecy do justice to
the Pauline doctrine of the 'last things.' True, Paul is himself a
'prophet,' thoroughly imbued with the fantastic Palestinian doctrines.
He, too, believes in a world-conflict, a triumph of the Messiah over
antichrist. More particularly in one of his very earliest epistles (2nd
Thessalonians) we get a glimpse into these Jewish peculiarities. But
these are always counterbalanced in Paul by a wider and soberer view,
which tends more and more to get the upper hand. His doctrine of
spiritual union with Christ, present apprehension of "the life that is
hid with Christ in God," a doctrine of Greek rather than Hebrew
parentage, prevails over the imagery of Jewish apocalypse. In the later
epistles he expects rather to "depart and be with Christ" than to be
"caught up into the air" with those that are alive and remain at the
'Coming.' So even if Paul did have occasion again and again to defend
his Jewish resurrection-doctrine against the Greek disposition to refine
it away into a mere doctrine of immortality, his remedy is not a mere
falling back into the crudities of Jewish millenarianism. Least of all
could he have sympathized with the nationalistic, and even vindictive
spirit of Rev. iv.-xxi., with its great battle of Jerusalem helped by
Messiah and the angels, against Rome helped by Satan and the Beast.
Paul's doctrine of the resurrection of the "body" by "clothing" of the
spirit with a "tabernacle" derived "from heaven," his hope of a
messianic Kingdom which is the triumph of humanity under a "second
Adam," has its apocalyptic traits. It is a victory over demonic enemies,
"spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places"; but it has the
reserve of an educated Pharisee against the cruder forms of Jewish
prophecy. It shows the mind of the cosmopolitan Roman citizen and
philosophic thinker, not merely that of the Jewish Zealot.

How salutary if Paul himself could have lived to control the divergent
elements among his churches, to check the subjective individualism of
the Gnostics on the one hand, and the reactionary tendencies of the
orthodox on the other. His parting words to his beloved Philippians are
sadly appreciative of how needful it was for their sake that he should
"abide in the flesh" (Phil. i. 24). Yet there was one thing still more
expedient--that he should abide with them in the spirit. And that is
just what we find evidenced in the great 'spiritual' Gospel and its
accompanying Epistles from Ephesus.

Debate still rages over a mere name, attached by tradition to these
writings that themselves bear no name. The titles prefixed by early
transcribers attribute them to "John." But they are never employed
before 175-180 in a way to even remotely suggest that they were then
regarded as written by John, or even as apostolic in any sense. And when
we trace the tradition back to its earliest form, in the Epilogue
attached to the Gospel (John xxi.) it seems to be no more than a dubious
attempt to identify that mysterious figure, the "disciple whom Jesus
loved." If, however, we postpone this question raised by the Epilogue,
the writings can at least be assigned to a definite locality (Ephesus)
and a fairly definite date (_c._ 105-110), with the general consent both
of ancient tradition and of modern criticism. This is for us the
important thing, since it enables us to understand their purpose and
bearing; whereas even those who contend that they were written by the
Apostle John can make little use of the alleged fact. For (1) the little
that is known of John from other sources is completely opposed to the
characteristics of these writings. They are characterized by a broad
universalism, and reproduce the mysticism of Paul. To attribute them to
the Pillar of Gal. ii. 9, or the Galilean fisherman of Mark i. 19 and
ix. 38, it becomes necessary to suppose that John after migrating to
Ephesus underwent a transformation so complete as to make him in reality
another man. (2) The meagre possibility that the basis of Revelation
might represent the Apostle John becomes more remote than ever. Now it
is a curious fact that critics who hold to the much-disputed tradition
that the Apostle John wrote the Gospel and Epistles, although these
writings make no such claim, and have no affinity with the known
character, show as a rule remarkable alacrity to dismiss the claims of
Revelation, which positively declares John to have been its author, and
has far stronger evidence, both internal and external, in support of the
claim, than have either the Gospel or the Epistles. We may prefer the
style and doctrine of the Gospel and Epistles, but this playing fast
and loose with the evidence can only discredit criticism of this type.
(3) The value of the demonstration of Johannine authorship would lie in
the fact that we should then have a first-hand witness to the actual
life and teaching of Jesus, immeasurably superior to the remote and
indirect tradition of the present Synoptic sources. But as a matter of
real fact those who maintain the Johannine authorship do not venture to
assert any such historical superiority. On the contrary they consider
the Synoptic tradition not only historically superior to "John," as
respects both sayings and course of events, but they are apt to
attribute to this Galilean apostle an extreme of Philonic abstraction,
so that he even prefers deliberate "fiction" to fact. Thus the reasoning
employed to defend the tradition destroys the only factor which could
give it value.

On the other hand it is possible to disregard these secondary disputes,
which aim only to increase or diminish the authority of the writings by
asserting or denying that they were written by the Apostle John, and to
approach the interpretation of them on the basis only of what is really
known, accredited both by ancient tradition and by modern criticism. On
this basis we can safely affirm that they originated in Ephesus early in
the second century, 'spiritualizing' what we have designated 'apostolic'
teaching, while at the same time strongly reacting against Doketic and
Antinomian heresy. By such a procedure we shall be employing modern
critical methods to the highest practical advantage in the interest of
genuinely historical interpretation.

Even those who find minute distinctions in style and point of view
between the Epistles and Gospel of John will admit that all four
documents emanate from the same period, situation, and circumstances,
and represent the same school of thought. We shall make no serious
mistake, then, if we treat them as written by the same individual, and
even as intended to accompany one another. We shall have the example of
so high an authority as Lightfoot, who considered 1st John an Epilogue
composed to accompany the Gospel in place of the present Epilogue (John
xxi.). Moreover the distinctions in the ancient treatment of 1st John
and the two smaller Epistles are all subsequent to the attribution of
the Gospel and First Epistle to the Apostle, and a consequence of it.
For 1st John and the Gospel had always been inseparable, and having no
name attached could easily be treated as the Apostle's. But 2nd and 3rd
John distinctly declare themselves written by an "Elder"; and in the
days when men still appreciated the distinction between an Elder and an
Apostle it was felt to be so serious a difficulty that 2nd and 3rd John
were put in the class of "disputed" writings. In reality 1st John and
the Gospel are just as certainly the work of an "Elder" as 2nd John and
3rd John, though no declaration to that effect is made. Moreover 1st
John and the Gospel may safely be treated as from the same author; for
such minute differences as exist in style and point of view can be fully
accounted for by the processes of revision the Gospel has demonstrably
undergone. This is more reasonable than to imagine two authors so
extraordinarily similar to one another and extraordinarily different
from everybody else.

"The Elder" does not give his name, and it is hopeless for us to try to
guess it, though it was of course well known to his "beloved" friend
"Gaius," to whom the third letter (the outside envelope) was addressed.
We have simply three epistles, one (3rd John) personal, to the aforesaid
Gaius, who is to serve as the writer's intermediary with "the church,"
because Diotrephes, its bishop, violently opposes him. Another (2nd
John) is addressed to a particular church ("the elect lady and her
children"), in all probability the church of Diotrephes and Gaius. It
may be the letter referred to in 3rd John 9. The third (1st John) is
entirely general, not even so much modified from the type of the homily
toward that of the epistle as Hebrews or James; for it has neither
superscription nor epistolary close. And yet it is, and speaks of itself
(i. 4; ii. 1, 7, 9, 12-14, etc.) as a literary product. It is not
impossible that this group of 'epistles,' one individual, one to a
particular church, one general, was composed after the plan of the
similar group addressed by Paul to churches of this same region,
Philemon, Colossians, and the more general epistle known to us as
Ephesians. They may have been intended to accompany and introduce the
Gospel written by the same author, just as the prophecies of Rev.
iv.-xxi. are introduced by the 'epistles' of Rev. i.-iii., or as
Luke-Acts is sent under enclosure to Theophilus for publication under
his patronage. At all events, be the connection with the Gospel closer
or more remote, to learn anything really reliable about the writer and
his purpose and environment we must begin with his own references to
them, first in the letter to Gaius, then in that to "the elect lady and
her children," then in his 'word of exhortation' to young and old, of
1st John. Thus we shall gain a historical approach finally to that
treatise on the manifestation of God in Christ which has won him the
title since antiquity of the 'theologian.'

Third John shows the author to be a man of eminence in the (larger?)
church whence he writes, old enough to speak of Gaius with commendation
as one of his "children," though Gaius himself is certainly no mere
youth, and eminent enough to call Diotrephes to answer for his
misconduct. He has sent out evangelistic workers, some of whom have
recently returned and borne witness "before the church" to their
hospitable reception by Gaius. For this he thanks Gaius, and urges him
to continue the good work. The main object of the letter, however, is
to commend Demetrius, who is doubtless the bearer of this letter as well
as another written "to the church" (2nd John?). This letter, the author
fears, will never reach its destination if Diotrephes has his way. There
is very little to indicate whence the opposition of Diotrephes arises,
but what little there is (ver. 11) points to those who make claims to
"seeing" God and being "of" Him, without adequate foundation in a life
of purity and beneficence. The letter "to the church" is more explicit.

Second John is perfectly definite in its purpose. After congratulating
the "elect lady" on those of her children (members) whom the writer has
found leading consistent Christian lives, he entreats the church to
remember the "new commandment" of Jesus, which yet is not new but the
foundation of all, the commandment of ministering love. The reason for
this urgency is that "many deceivers are gone forth into the world, even
they that confess not that Jesus Christ cometh in the flesh" (ver. 7).
And here we come upon a very novel and distinctive application of an
ancient datum of 'prophecy,' clearly differentiating this writer from
the author of Revelation. The Doketic heresy is explicitly identified
with "the deceiver and the antichrist." That must have been a new and
surprising turn for men accustomed to connect the antichrist idea with
the persecuting power of Rome. Satan, as we know, had been repeatedly
conceived as operating through the coercion of outward force brought
against the Messiah and his people through the Beast and the false
Prophet (Rev. xiii.). There was good authority, too, for a mystical "man
of sin" setting himself forth as God in the temple (2nd Thess. ii. 4),
or for connecting Daniel's "abomination that maketh desolate" with the
sufferings of the Jewish war and the later attempts of false prophets to
deceive the elect with lying wonders (2nd Thess. ii. 9; Mark xiii. 22;
Rev. xiii. 14). But this was a new application of the prophecy. To
declare that the heretical teachers were themselves antichrists was to
call the attention of the church back from outward opposition to inward
disloyalty as the greater peril. And the identification is not
enunciated in this general warning alone, but fully developed and
defended in two elaborate paragraphs of the 'word of exhortation' (1st
John ii. 18-29; iv. 1-6). When, therefore, we find Polycarp in his
letter (110-171) quietly adopting the idea, almost as an understood
thing, declaring "For every one who shall not confess that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, is antichrist" (vii. 1), it becomes almost a
certainty that he had read 1st John.[27]

    Footnote 27: Not 2nd John; for it is only in 1st John ii. 18 that
    the elder speaks of "many antichrists," identifying each separate
    Doketist with the apocalyptic figure. In 2nd John vii. it is the
    heresy itself as a phenomenon which constitutes _the_ antichrist.

Our elder's warning "to the church" (perhaps more particularly its
governing body) is to beware of these deceivers; not to receive them,
nor even to greet them, because they "go onward" (are 'progressives')
and do not "abide in the teaching of Christ." To abide in this
"teaching" is the church's only safeguard.

If next we turn to the more general epistle known as 1st John the lack
of any superscription is more than counterbalanced by the writer's full
and explicit declarations regarding motive and occasion. The epistle was
certainly intended to be read before entire congregations. Of part of it
at least the author himself says that it was "written concerning them
that would lead you astray" (ii. 26). Comparison of the full
denunciation with what we know of Doketism from its own writings, such
as the so-called _Acts of John_ (_c._ 175), shows very plainly what type
of heresy is meant. Moreover we have the Epistles of Ignatius, written
to these same churches but a few years later, and the detailed
descriptions of the Doketist Cerinthus and his doctrines given by
Irenæus, together with the explicit statement that the writings of John
were directed against this same Cerinthus.

Yet 1st John is far more than a mere polemic. The author writes to those
"that believe on the name of the Son of God, that they may know that
they have eternal life" (v. 13). This certainly is the result of the
conscious indwelling of the Spirit of Jesus. It is not evidenced,
however, by boastful words as to illumination, insight and knowledge,
but by practical obedience to the one new commandment; for "God is love,
and he that _loveth_ (not he that hath _gnosis_) is begotten of God and
knoweth God." This inward witness of the Spirit is a gift, or (to use
our author's term) an "anointing" (_i. e._ a 'Christ'-ening), whose
essence is as much beyond the Greek's ideal of wisdom, on the one side,
as it is beyond the Jew's ideal of miraculous powers on the other. It is
a spirit of ministering love corresponding to and emanating from the
nature of God himself. This is "the teaching of Christ" in which alone
it is safe to "abide."

But again as respects the historic tradition of the church our author is
not less emphatic. He values the record of an actual, real, and tangible
experience of this manifested life of God in man. The "progressives" may
repudiate the mere Jesus of "the flesh," in favour of one who comes by
water only (_i. e._ in the outpouring of the Spirit in baptism), and not
by the blood of the cross. For the doctrine of the cross was a special
stumbling-block to Doketists, who rejected the sacrament of the bread
and wine.[28] The actual sending of God's only-begotten Son into the
world, the real "propitiation" for our sins (so lightly denied by the
illuminati), is a vital point to the writer. The sins "of the whole
world" were atoned for in Jesus' blood actually shed on Calvary. The
church possesses, then, in this story a record of fact of infinite
significance to the world. The Doketists are playing fast and loose with
this record of the historic Jesus. They deny any value to the "flesh" in
which the æon Christ had merely tabernacled as its "receptacle" between
the period of the baptism and the ascension--an event which they date
_before_ the death on the cross.[29] They are met here with a peremptory
challenge and declaration. The experience of contact with the earthly
Jesus which the Church cherishes as its most inestimable treasure is the
assurance, and the only assurance that we have, of real fellowship with
the Father; for "the life, the eternal life" of God in man, the
Logos--to borrow frankly the Stoic expression--is known not by mere
mystical dreams, but by the historic record of those who personally knew
the real Jesus. The manifestation of God, in short, is objective and
historical, and not merely inward and self-conscious; and that outward
and objective manifestation may be summed up in what we of the Christian
brotherhood have seen and known of Jesus.

    Footnote 28: In the _Acts of John_ the Christ spirit which had been
    resident in Jesus comes to John after he has fled to a cave on the
    Mount of Olives from the posse that arrested the Lord. The sweet
    voice of the invisible Christ informs him there that the blinded
    multitude below had tortured a mere bodily shape which they took to
    be Christ, "while I stood by and laughed." In the _Gospel of Peter_
    Jesus hung upon the cross "as one who feels no pain" and was "taken
    up" before the end.

    Footnote 29: See note preceding.

It is when we approach the Fourth Gospel by way of its own author's
adaptation of his message to the conditions around him that we begin to
appreciate it historically, and in its true worth. The spirit of polemic
is still prominent in 1st John, but the Gospel shows the effect of
opposition only in the more careful statement of the evangelist's exact
meaning. It is a theological treatise, an interpretation of the doctrine
of the person of Christ, written that the readers "may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they may have
life in his name" (xx. 31). In an age so eagerly bent on ascertaining
the historic facts regarding Jesus' life, and the true sequence of
events (Luke i. 1-4), it is insupposable that an author so strenuous to
uphold the concrete reality of the church's historic tradition should
not give real history so far as he was able. He could not afford to
depreciate it in the face of Doketic myth and fancy and contempt for a
"Christ in the flesh." The idea that such a writer could deliberately
prefer fiction to fact is most improbable; ten times more so if he was
the only surviving representative of the twelve, a Galilean disciple
even more intimate than Peter with Jesus from the outset. But real
history was no longer attainable. The author of the Fourth Gospel
reports no event which he does not take in good faith to be fact. Yet it
must be apparent from his own statement of his purpose as well as from
the very structure of the book that he does not aim to be a historian,
but an interpreter of doctrine. He aims to give not _fact_ but _truth_.
And his handling of (supposed) fact has the freedom we should expect in
a church teacher of that age, and of the school of Paul the mystic. The
seven progressive "signs" that he narrates, culminating in the raising
of Lazarus, are avowedly (xx. 31) illustrative selections from a
multitude of current tales of miracle, aiming to produce that faith in
Jesus as the Son of God which will result in "life," _i. e._ the eternal
life which consists in his indwelling (1st John v. 20). They are not
described as acts of pity, drawn from one with whom the power of God was
found present to heal. Jesus does not yield as in the Synoptics when
compassion for trusting need overcomes reluctance to increase the
importunity that interfered with his higher mission. Their prime purpose
is to "manifest the glory" of the incarnate Logos, and Jesus performs
them only when, and as, he chooses. Pity and natural affection are
almost trampled upon that this "manifestation of his glory" may be made
more effective (ii. 4; iv. 48; ix. 3; xi. 4-6, 15). As in Paul, there is
no exorcism. This most typical and characteristic miracle of Petrine
story (Mark iii. 15; Acts x. 88) has disappeared. Or rather (as in Paul)
the casting out of Satan from his dominion over the entire world has
transcended and superseded it (John xii. 31-33; _cf._ Col. ii. 15). In
John, requests for miracle, whether in faith or unbelief, always incur
rebuke (ii. 4; iv. 48; vi. 30-36; vii. 4-7; xi. 3-15). Jesus offers and
works them when "his hour" comes, whether applied for or not (v. 6-9;
vi. 6; ix. 1-7). His reserve is not due to a limitation of almighty
power; for the power is declared explicitly to be his, _in his own
right_ (v. 21; xi. 22, 25, 42). He restrains it only that faith may rest
upon conviction of the truth rather than mere wonder (ii. 23-25; iii. 2
f.; iv. 39-42, 48; vi. 29-46; xiv. 11). He is, in short, an omniscient
(i. 47-50; ii. 25), omnipotent Being, temporarily sojourning on the
earth (iii. 13; xvi. 28).

The dialogue interwoven with these seven signs is closely related in
subject to them. It does not aim to repeat remembered Sayings, but
follows that literary form which since Plato had been the classic model
for presenting the themes of philosophy. The subject-matter is no
longer, as in the Synoptics, the Righteousness required by God, the
Nature and Coming of the Kingdom, Duty to God and Man. It is the person
and function of the speaker himself. Instead of the parables we have
allegories: "seven 'I am's'" of Jesus, in debate with "the Jews" about
the doctrine of his own person as Son of God.

This uniformity of topic corresponds with a complete absence of any
attempt to differentiate in style between utterances of Jesus, or the
Baptist, or the evangelist himself, in Gospel or Epistles. Had the
writer desired, it is certain that he could have collected sayings of
Jesus, and given them a form similar to those of Matthew and Luke. He
does not try. The only device he employs to suggest a distinction is an
oracular ambiguity at first misunderstood, and so requiring progressive
unfolding. The main theme is often introduced by a peculiar and solemn
"Verily, verily."

As with the 'signs' the lingering Synoptic sense of progress and
proportion has disappeared. At the very outset John the Baptist
proclaims to his followers that his own baptism has no value in itself.
It is not "for repentance unto remission of sins." It is _only_ to make
the Christ "manifest" (i. 19-34). Christ's atonement alone will take
away the sin (i. 29), Christ's baptism alone will convey real help (i.
34). Jesus, too, proclaims himself from the outset the Christ, in the
full Pauline sense of the word (i. 45-51; iv. 26, etc.). He chooses
Judas with the express purpose of the betrayal, and forces on the
reluctant agents of his fate (vi. 70 f.; xiii. 26 f.; xviii. 4-8;
xix. 8-11).

All this, and much more which we need not cite, makes hardly the
pretence of being history. It is frankly theology, or rather
apologetics. We have as a framework the general outline of Mark, a
Galilean and a Judæan ministry (chh. i.-xii.; xiii.-xx.), with traces of
a Perean journey (vii. 1 ff.). This scheme, however, is broken through
by another based on the Mosaic festal system, Jesus showing in each case
as he visits Jerusalem, the higher symbolism of the ceremonial (ii. 13
ff. Passover; v. 1 ff. Pentecost; vii. 1 ff. Tabernacles; x. 22
ff. Dedication; xii. 1 ff. Passover). There is in chh. i.-iv. a
'teaching of baptisms' and of endowment with the Spirit corresponding
roughly to Mark i. 1-45. There is in ch. v. a teaching of the authority
of Jesus against Moses and the Law, corresponding to Mark ii. 1--iii. 6.
There is a teaching of the 'breaking of bread' corresponding to Mark vi.
30--viii. 26 in John vi., though this last has been related not merely to
the brotherhood banquet ('love-feast') as in Mark, but anticipates and
takes the place of the teaching as to the Eucharist (_cf._ John vi.
52-59 with John xiii.). There is a Commission of the Twelve like Matt.
x. 16-42, though placed (with Luke xxii. 35-38) as a second sending on
the night of betrayal (xiii. 31--xviii. 26). There is dependence on
Petrine Story, and to some extent on Matthæan Sayings. In particular
John xii. 1-7 combines the data of Mark xiv. 3-9 with those of Luke vii.
36-50; x. 38-42 in a curious compound, making it certain that the
evangelist employed these two--and Matthew as well, if xii. 8 be
genuine (it is not found in the ancient Syriac). Yet our Synoptic
Gospels are not the only sources, and the material borrowed is handled
with sovereign superiority. In short, as even the church fathers
recognized, this Gospel is of a new type. It does aim to "supplement"
the others, as they recognized; but not as one narrative may piece out
and complete another. Rather as the unseen and spiritual supplements the
external and visible. This Gospel uses the established forms of
miracle-story and saying; but it transforms the one into symbol, the
other into dialogue and allegory. Then by use of this material
(supplemented from unknown, perhaps oral, sources) it constructs a
series of interpretations of the person and work of the God-man.

Of one peculiarly distinctive feature we have still to speak. Where the
reader has special need of an interpreter to attest and interpret a
specially vital fact, such as the scenes of the night of the betrayal,
or the reality of Jesus' propitiatory death (denied by the Doketists),
or the beginning of the resurrection faith, Peter's testimony is
supplemented and transcended by that of a hitherto unknown figure, who
anticipates all that Peter only slowly attains. This is the mysterious,
unnamed "disciple whom Jesus loved" (xiii. 23 ff.; xviii. 15 f.;
xix. 25-37; xx. 1-10; _cf._ Gal. xx. 20), a Paul present in the spirit,
to see things with the eye of spiritual insight. There is no
transfiguration-scene and no prayer of Gethsemane in this
Gospel--Transfiguration is needless where the glory shines uninterrupted
through the whole career. Prayer itself is impossible where oneness with
the God-head makes difference of thought or purpose inconceivable. Hence
the prayers of Jesus are often only "for the sake of those that stand
by" (xi. 41 f.). The same is true of the Voice from heaven at the
scene which takes the place of Transfiguration and Gethsemane in one
(xii. 27-33). Jesus will not ask for deliverance from that hour, because
he had sought it from the beginning. His prayer is "Father, glorify thy
name." The Voice, which some take to be an angel speaking to him (_cf._
Luke ix. 35; xxii. 43) is for the sake of the bystanders. The Voice at
his baptism likewise is not addressed to him (the incarnate Logos does
not need a revelation of his own identity) but to the Baptist.

So again and again Synoptic scenes are retouched and new scenes are
added in a way to present a consistent picture of the "tabernacling" of
the pre-existent Son of God in human flesh. As we review the whole, and
ask ourselves, What is the occasion of this strange new presentation of
the evangelic message? we begin to realize how indispensable is the key
which the evangelist has himself hung before the door. Many and complex
are the problems which confront us as we move through this heaped-up
tangle of anecdote, dialogue, and allegory. There is room for the
keenest scrutiny of criticism to determine, if possible, when, and how,
and from what sources these meditations were put together. But nothing
that critical insight, analysis, and comparison can furnish avails so
much to throw real light upon the work as what the evangelist himself
has done, by setting forth in a prologue (i. 1-18) the fundamental
principles of his conception.

In a word evangelic tradition as it had hitherto found currency still
lacked the fundamental thing in the Christology of Paul--the Incarnation
doctrine. Paul conceived the story of Jesus as a supernal drama,
beginning and ending in heaven at God's right hand. Even Matthew and
Luke, carrying back the adoption to Son ship from the baptism to the
birth of Jesus, had not essentially changed the pre-Pauline point of
view. Still there was no pre-existence. Jesus was not yet shown as the
Wisdom of God, through whom all things were created, the "heavenly man,"
the second Adam, taking upon him the form of a servant, humbling himself
and becoming obedient unto death, rich, and for our sakes becoming poor.
He was still, even in Mark, just the prophet mighty in deed and word,
raised up by God from among his brethren, and for his obedience exalted
to the messianic throne of glory. How _could_ this satisfy churches
trained in the doctrine of Paul? We should almost rather marvel that the
Synoptic narratives ever found lodgment at all, where Paul had preached
from the beginning a doctrine of the eternal Christ.

And the transformation is not one whit more radical than we ought to
anticipate. The Transfiguration story had been a halting attempt to
embody Pauline doctrine in Petrine story. But apart from the obvious
hold afforded to mere Doketism, how inadequate to Paul's conception of
the "Man from heaven"! The Fourth evangelist depicts the person of Jesus
consistently and throughout, despite his meagre and refractory material,
along the lines of Pauline Christology. There is no concession to
Doketism, for in spite of all, and designedly (iv. 6; xix. 28, 34),
Jesus is still no phantasm, but true man among men. There is no
hesitation to override, where needful, on vital points the great and
growing authority of 'apostolic' tradition. Tacitly, but
uncompromisingly, Petrine tradition is set aside. The "disciple whom
Jesus loved" sees the matter otherwise. In particular, apocalyptic
eschatology is firmly repressed in favour of a doctrine of eternal life
in the Spirit. The second Coming is not to be a manifestation "to the
world." It will be an inward indwelling of God and Christ in the heart
of the believer (xiv. 22 f.).[30] The place of future reward is not a
glorified Palestine and transfigured, rebuilt Jerusalem. The disciple,
like Paul, will "depart to be with Christ." The Father's house is wider
than the Holy Land. It has "many mansions," and the servant must be
content to know that his Master will receive him where he dwells himself
(xiv. 1-3; xvii. 24).

    Footnote 30: Some few passages inconsistent with this are found in
    the body of the Gospel. Like that of the appendix (xxi. 22) they are
    later modifications of a doctrine too Hellenic for the majority.

To realize what it meant to produce the 'spiritual' Gospel that comes to
us from Ephesus shortly after the close of the first century we must
place ourselves side by side with men who had learnt the gospel of Paul
_about_ Jesus, the drama of the eternal, pre-existent, "heavenly Man,"
incarnate, triumphant through the cross over the Prince of this world
and powers of darkness. We must realize how they found it needful to
impregnate the 'apostolic' material of Petrine and Matthæan tradition
with this deeper significance, preserving the concrete, historic fact,
and the real manhood, and yet supplementing the disproportionately
external story with a wealth of transcendental meaning. The spirit of
Paul was, indeed, not dead. Neither Gnostic heresy could dissipate it,
nor reactionary Christianized legalism absorb it. It had been reborn in
splendid authority and power. In due time it would prove itself the very
mould of 'catholic' doctrine. The Fourth gospel, as its Prologue
forewarns, is an application to the story of Jesus as tradition reported
it of the Pauline incarnation doctrine formulated under the Stoic Logos
theory. It represents a study in the psychology of religion applied to
the person of Christ. Poor as Paul himself in knowledge of the outward
Jesus, unfamiliar with really historical words and deeds, its doctrine
_about_ Jesus became, nevertheless, like that of the great Apostle to
the Gentiles, the truest exposition of 'the heart of Christ.'




CHAPTER X

EPILOGUES AND CONCLUSIONS


Few of the great writings cherished and transmitted by the early church
have escaped the natural tendency to attachments at beginning and end.
In the later period such attachments took the form of prefixed
_argumenta_, _i. e._ prefatory descriptions of author and contents, and
affixed _subscriptions_, devoted to a similar purpose. These, like the
titles, were clearly distinguished from the text itself, and in modern
editions are usually not printed, though examples of 'subscriptions' may
be seen in the King James version after the Pauline Epistles. Before the
time when canonization had made such a process seem sacrilege they were
attached to the text itself, with greater or less attempt to weld the
parts together. We need not add to what has been already said as to
certain superscriptions of the later epistolary literature, such as
James and Jude, where the relation to the text impresses us as closer
than is sometimes admitted; nor need we delay with the preamble to
Revelation (Rev. i. 1-3). That which has been added at the close, in
cases where real evidence exists of such later supplementation, is of
special significance to our study, inasmuch as it tends to throw light
where light is most required. For that is an obscure period, early in
the second century, when not only the churches themselves were drawing
together toward catholic unity under the double pressure of inward and
outward peril, but were bringing with them their treasured writings,
sometimes a collection of Epistles, sometimes a Gospel, or a book of
Prophecy, sometimes, as in the groups of writings attributed to John and
Peter, a full canon of Gospel, Epistles and Apocalypse, followed but
little later by 'Acts' as well.

The most ancient list of books authorized to be publicly read that we
possess is that of the church of Rome _c._ 185, called after its
discoverer the Canon of Muratori. From this fragment, mutilated at
beginning and end, we learn that Paul's letters to the churches were
arranged in a group of seven[31] of which Romans stood last. It is
probably due to its position at the end that Romans has been
supplemented by the addition of Pauline fragments, which did not appear
in some early editions of the text. The letter proper ends with ch. xv.
though xvi. 21-23 probably followed, perhaps concluding with ver. 24,
which some texts insert after ver. 19. Ver. 25-27 is another fragment
omitted in some texts.

    Footnote 31: The personal letters formed a separate group. Two
    letters to the same church (1st Cor., 2nd Cor.) were counted as one.
    Marcion (140) counted ten in all, and had a different order.

We have seen above (p. 200) how Revelation has received conclusion after
conclusion, so that the relation of personalities has become almost
unintelligible. We have very meagre textual material for Revelation, and
can scarcely judge whether any of the process represented in Rev. xxii.
6-21 belongs to the period of transmission, after the publication of the
book in its present form. Until the discovery of new textual evidence
the phenomena in Revelation must be treated by principles of the higher
criticism, as pertaining to its history before publication. At all
events we know that the attribution to "John" (ver. 8 f.) was current
as early as Justin's _Apology_ (153).

The longer and shorter supplements to Mark belong again to the field of
textual criticism. The manuscripts and early translations carry us back
to a time when neither ending was known; though only to leave us
wondering how the necessity arose for composing them--a question of the
higher criticism. Mark xvi. 9-20 shows acquaintance with Luke, and
probably with John xx. It is noteworthy, however, in view of the
author's attempt to cover the resurrection appearances of these two
gospels, that he betrays no sign of acquaintance with John. xxi. In this
case of the Roman gospel, however, textual evidence enables us to trace
something of the history of supplementation. The so-called 'Shorter'
ending provides a close for the incomplete story, resembling Matthew,
while the 'Longer' is drawn from Luke and John. i.-xx. Subsequent
employments show that the 'Longer' ending had been attached (perhaps at
Rome) not later than _c._ 150. It is the first evidence we have of
combination of the Fourth gospel with the Synoptics; for even Justin,
though _affected_ by John, does not _use_ it as he uses Matthew, Mark
and Luke. Parity among the four is not traceable earlier than Tatian
(_c._ 175), the father of gospel 'harmonies.' The 'Shorter' ending, if
not the Longer as well, would seem to have been added in Egypt. The
supplements to Mark have this at least of singular interest, that they
show the progress of a process whose beginnings we traced back to
Palestine itself in the church of the 'apostles, elders and witnesses of
the Lord,' where "the Elder" in the tradition reported by Papias is
already offering explanations of the disagreements of Matthew and Mark
with a view to their concurrent circulation.

After the addition of Mark to Matthew it was comparatively easy to take
in Luke-Acts as a third, and to form composites out of the three such as
the _Gospel of Peter_ (North Syria _c._ 130) and the _Gospel of the
Nazarenes_ (Coele-Syria _c._ 140). Justin at Rome (_c._ 153) is still
such a three-gospel man, though affected by the Fourth; whereas his
predecessor Hermas (125-140) seems to rest on Mark alone, though perhaps
acquainted with Matthew. The step was a harder one which aimed to take
in the Fourth gospel. Tatian at Rome (_c._ 175) and Theophilus at
Antioch (181) are the agents of its accomplishment; and, as we have
seen, it was not effected without a determined opposition, led at Rome
by the presbyter Gaius, and answered by Irenæus (_c._ 186) and
Hippolytus (_c._ 215). Such opposition from the side of advocates of
Petrine apostolicity is anticipated in the most significant and
important of all the epilogues, the so-called Appendix or Epilogue to
the Fourth gospel (John xxi.).

Just when, or where, this supplement was added is one of the most
difficult problems of the higher criticism. On the side of external
evidence we have the fact that it shows no effect in Mark xvi. 9-21,
where John xx. is employed, and that there is a great change about A.D.
170 in the treatment of this Gospel and its related Epistles, those who
use them before this time showing no disposition to treat them as having
high apostolic authority. On the side of internal evidence there are
such data as the use of the second-century name for the Sea of Galilee
("Sea of Tiberias," xxi. 1), and references to the martyrdom of Peter at
Rome (xxi. 18 f.) and to legends of John as the 'witness' who should
survive until the Coming (xxi. 23). Whether these data suggest an origin
at Ephesus, or at Rome, and at just what date, are problems for
technical research. That which is of chief interest for us is the motive
and function of this supplement to the Ephesian Gospel, and the light it
throws upon conditions in the church at large.

It is quite apparent that John xxi. forms a subsequent attachment after
the formal conclusion of the Gospel proper in xx. 30 f. For, apart
from differences in style and doctrinal standpoint, it makes a complete
new departure along the lines of Mark's story of Galilean resurrection
manifestations; whereas the Gospel follows the Lukan type, and brings
everything to a close without removal from Jerusalem. The message to the
disciples by the women at the sepulchre is here given by Jesus in person
as in Matt. xxviii. 10, and is actually delivered as in Luke xxiv. 10
f. It is followed by the promised manifestation to the disciples with
the overcoming of their incredulity, and by the great Commission,
accompanied by the Gift of the Spirit. The story has thus been brought
to a formal conclusion, the invariable and necessary conclusion of all
evangelic narratives. The author's recapitulation of the nature and
contents of his book and assurance in direct address to the reader of
his purpose in writing ("that _ye_ may believe") follows appropriately
as a winding up of the whole. It is not conceivable that the same
writer should resume immediately after this, at an earlier point in the
narrative, where the disciples are still scattered in Galilee,
unconscious of their vocation and commission. For in spite of the
endeavour of the supplementer in ver. 14 to make this out "the third[32]
time that Jesus was manifested" they have manifestly returned to their
original means of livelihood unawakened to the resurrection faith.
Moreover the story culminates with a restoration of Peter to favour,
with unmistakable reference to his humiliating failure to live up to the
promise (xiii. 36-38), "Lord, why cannot I follow thee even now? I will
lay down my life for thee" (_cf._ xxi. 15-19). If it had been the
evangelist's intention to tell this he would have told it before the
Commission in xx. 19-23. In short, we have here two widely variant forms
of the tradition of the rallying of the disciples from their unbelief by
the risen Christ and commissioning of them to their task. The two
commissions, one a general commission of all "the twelve," like Matt.
xviii. 18, the other a special commission of Peter like Matt. xvi. 19,
are attached one after the other, with the curious infelicity that the
restoration of Peter from his defection, together with his installation
as chief under-shepherd of the flock, comes _after_ the commission in
which he has already appeared with the rest, restored to full faith and
favour, and gifted with the inspiration and authority of the Spirit.

    Footnote 32: A miscount for "fourth," unless we disregard xx. 11-18,
    or else (with Wellhausen) consider xx. 24-29 an insertion later than
    the Epilogue.

It is true that the function of "tending the flock of God" (_cf._ 1st
Pet. v. 2) committed to Peter in xxi. 15-19 is a more special one than
the apostolate conferred on all in xx. 21-23; but the Epilogue has
previously (xxi. 1-14) given to Peter a special and commanding part in
the apostolate (extension of the gospel to the world). No one will
question that in such a writer as the Fourth evangelist (and if anything
still more the writer of the Epilogue) narratives of miracle are
intended to have a symbolical sense. Nor will it be denied that the
miraculous draft of fishes, which in Luke v. 1-11 attends the original
vocation of "Simon,"[33] is here applied to the work the twelve are to
accomplish in the now opening future as "fishers of men." The
particularization of the number of the fishes, and the statement that
the peril of the rending of the net (_cf._ Luke v. 6) was happily
avoided, are, of course, also intended to convey a symbolical sense,
which Jerome makes still easier to grasp by informing us that 153 was
taken by naturalists of the time to be the full number of all species of
fish. John xxi. 1-14 is therefore a primitive story of the appearance
of Jesus after his resurrection "to Peter and them that were with him,"
in Galilee (not in Jerusalem as in John i.-xx. and Luke), having a
relation to Luke v. 1-11, and probably also to Matt. xiv. 28-33 (_cf._
John xxi. 7). It is also nearly akin to the fragment at the end of the
_Gospel of Peter_. It symbolizes the work of the apostolic mission under
the figure of the fishing of men (_cf._ Mark i. 17; Matt. xiii. 47-50),
and gives to Peter the leading part. In fact Peter not only comes to the
Lord in advance of all the rest, and alone maintains with him something
like the intimate relations of the past, but performs after his private
interview with Jesus the gigantic feat of bringing unaided to land the
entire miraculous catch. The great and various multitude, which all
working in common had enclosed in the net, but had not been able to lift
into the boat, Peter, at Jesus' word, brought safely home. The writer
who so employs the already conventionalized symbols of ecclesiastical
imagery, surely had no mean idea of the apostleship of Peter. In at
least as high degree as the author of Acts he conceives of Peter as
commissioned in a special sense to be the great director and leader of
all missionary activity, to Gentiles as well as Jews (Acts xv. 7), and
to have been the saviour of the unity of the church in the hour of its
threatened disruption. When in addition he is invested by Jesus with the
insignia and office of chief under-shepherd of the flock of God, the
stain of his threefold denial wiped out by a threefold opportunity to
prove his special love by special service, and the ignominy of his
previous failure to "follow" (xiii. 36-38) atoned for by the promise
that in old age he shall have opportunity to follow Jesus in martyrdom
(xxi. 18 f.), there remains nothing that the most exacting friend of
'catholic' apostolicity could demand in the way of tribute to its great
representative.

    Footnote 33: The addition in ver. 10_a_ and the plural "they" in
    ver. 11, are mere editorial adaptations of the story to Mark i.
    16-20.

And yet the main object of the Epilogue has not yet been touched. It was
not written, we may be sure, merely to glorify Peter; though it is, of
course, insupposable that the Gospel in its primitive form simply left
Peter in the attitude of a renegade after xviii. 27, to reappear quite
as if nothing had happened in xx. 1 ff.[34] It pays its tribute to
Peter as chief witness to the resurrection, chief apostle, chief saviour
of the unity of the church, chief under-shepherd of the flock of God, in
the interest of that catholic apostolic unity which all churchmen were
so earnestly labouring to achieve in the writer's time, and for which
the name of Peter was increasingly significant. But the chief object of
the Epilogue is something else. It was written primarily to commend and
find room for another authority, the authority of the Gospel to which
it is appended, and which repeatedly sets over against Peter a
mysterious unnamed figure, who always sees when Peter is blind, believes
when Peter is unbelieving, is faithful when Peter and all the rest have
fled in cowardly desertion. The object of the Epilogue is to find room
alongside the growing and salutary authority of Peter for the authority
and message of "the disciple whom Jesus loved." Its purpose appears in
its conclusion, "This (the disciple whom Jesus loved) is the disciple
which beareth witness of these things, and wrote these things, and we
(the church which cherishes and gives forth this 'spiritual' Gospel)
know that his witness is true."

    Footnote 34: We must conclude that _both_ these data from Synoptic
    tradition, the denial (xiii. 36-38; xviii. 15-18, 25-27) _and_ the
    restoration (ch. xxi.) are supplements to the original form of the
    Gospel.

The writer does not explicitly say that he means the Apostle John
(reputed in Ephesus the author of Revelation); for such direct
identification might well endanger his own object. But he makes it clear
in two ways that John is really intended, as, indeed, subsequent writers
immediately infer.[35] (1) "The sons of Zebedee" are introduced for the
first time in the entire work in xxi. 2, among the group who are present
with Peter. An easy process of elimination,[36] then, leaves open to
identification as "the disciple whom Jesus loved" (ver. 7) only John, or
else one of the two unnamed "other disciples," who could hardly be
reckoned among Jesus' closest intimates.

    Footnote 35: The _Muratorianum_ bases its legendary account of the
    writing of the Fourth gospel by "John" with the endorsement of "his
    fellow-disciples and bishops" on John xxi. 24.

    Footnote 36: The early death of James the son of Zebedee (Acts xii.
    1) excludes him from consideration.

(2) The scene of the prediction of Peter's martyrdom (xxi. 18 f.) is
followed immediately (ver. 20-23) by a reference to traditions which we
know to have been current before the close of the first century
regarding the martyrdom of the two sons of Zebedee, in particular
regarding John. Peter in xxi. 21 raises the question as to the _fate_ of
"the disciple whom Jesus loved" (literally, "and as to this man,
what?"). The pregnant command of Jesus to Peter, "Follow me," is clearly
intended to have reference to martyrdom (_cf._ xiii. 36 f.), and it is
obeyed by "the disciple whom Jesus loved" as well as Peter. Peter's
inquiry and the Lord's reply had given rise "among the brethren" to the
belief that this disciple would "tarry" till the Coming. Now it is of
John, son of Zebedee, and only of him, that we have a curious
vacillation of ancient tradition between belief in his martyrdom in the
same sense as his brother James (Mark x. 39), and a belief (probably
based on Mark ix. 1) that he would tarry as an abiding witness until the
Coming ('white martyrdom'). The writer of the Epilogue has manifestly
these traditions about the fate of John in mind. He would have his
readers understand that the enigmatic prophecy of Jesus neither
promised the permanent survival of John, nor his violent death, but was
at least capable of an interpretation which set John alongside of Peter,
not as a rival of his leadership, or directive control, but simply as a
witness ('martyr') to the truth. Peter is willingly granted the office
of 'ruling elder' in the church, if only "the disciple whom Jesus loved"
may have the function of the prophet and teacher 'in the Spirit,' the
man of faith and insight, whose function it is to interpret 'the mind of
Christ.'

Few things could be more significant of the conditions of Christian life
and thought in the earlier years of the second century than this
Epilogue, appended to the 'spiritual' Gospel to commend it to general
acceptance in the church. It is not vitally important whether the
cautiously suggested identification of the Beloved Disciple with John,
the son of Zebedee, be correct or not. It is important to a historical
appreciation of the great literary contribution of the churches of Paul
to the 'catholic' Christianity of the second century, that we realize
what Petrine catholicity had then come to mean, and how the Pauline
spiritual gospel came half-way to meet it. On this point a study of the
epilogues is rewarding, but especially of the great Epilogue to the
Gospel of John.

We have reached the period for our own concluding words. The process of
combination and canonization of the New Testament writings, which
followed upon the consolidation of the churches in the second century
falls outside our province. We have sought only to give some insight
into the origins, considering the Making of the New Testament to apply
rather to the creations of the formative period, when conscious
inspiration was still in its full glow, than to the period of collection
into an official canon. As we look back over the two leading types of
Christian thought, Pauline and 'Apostolic,' the Greek-Christian gospel
_about_ Jesus, and the Jewish-Christian gospel _of_ Jesus, the gospel of
the Spirit and the gospel of authority, we cannot fail to realize how
deep and broad and ancient are the two great currents of religious
thought and life that here are mingling, contending, coming to new
expression and clearer definition. Each has its various subdivisions and
modifications, Pauline Christianity in the Greek world has its problems
of resistance to Hellenistic perversion on the one side, to reaction
toward Jewish external authority on the other. Apostolic Christianity
whether in its more conservative form at Jerusalem, or in broader
assimilation to Pauline doctrine at Antioch and Rome, has also its
divergent streams, its more primitive and its more developed stages. The
literature, as we slowly come to appreciate it against the background of
the times, more and more reveals itself as an index to the life. Not to
the mere idiosyncrasies of individuals, but to the great Gulf-stream of
the human instinct for social Righteousness and for individual
Redemption, as it sweeps onward in its mighty tide.

The literature of the New Testament must be understood historically if
understood at all. It must be understood as the product, we might almost
say the precipitate, of the greatest period in the history of religion.
It represents the meeting and mutual adjustment of two fundamental and
complementary conceptions of religion. The antithesis is not merely that
between the particularism of the Jew and the universalism of the
Gentile. It is an antithesis of the social ideal of Law and Prophets
against the individual ideal of personal redemption through union with
the divine Spirit, which lay at the heart of all vital Hellenistic
religious thought in this period of the Empire. Christianity as we know
it, the religion of humanity as it has come to be, the ultimate
world-religion as we believe it destined to become, is a resultant of
these two factors, Semitic and Aryan, the social and the individual
ideal. Its canonized literature represents the combination. On the one
side the social ideal is predominant. It perpetuates the gospel _of_
Jesus in the form of Matthæan and Petrine tradition, supplemented by
apocalypse, which tradition attaches conjecturally to the name of John.
The goal it seeks is the Kingdom of God, righteousness and peace on
earth as in heaven. On the other side the individual ideal predominates.
It perpetuates the gospel _about_ Jesus in the form of the Pauline and
Johannine doctrine of his person, regarded as the norm and type of
spiritual life. The goal it seeks is personal immortality by moral
fellowship with God. Its faith is Son ship, by participation in the
divine nature, without limitation in time, without loss of individual
identity. Both types of gospel are justified in claiming to emanate from
Jesus of Nazareth; but neither without the other can claim to fully
represent the significance of his spirit and life.

The unity of the New Testament is a unity in diversity. Just because it
presents so widely divergent conceptions of what the gospel is, it gives
promise of perennial fecundity. Studied not after the manner of the
scribes, who think that in their book of precept and prophecy they have
a passport to rewards in a magical world to come, but studied as a
"manifestation of the life, even the eternal life" of the Spirit of God
in man, it will continue to reproduce the spirit and mind of Christ.
Studied as a reflection at various times and in divers manners of that
redemptive Wisdom of God, which "in every generation entering into holy
souls makes men to be prophets and friends of God" (Sap. vii. 27), and
which the Greeks, considering it, unfortunately, in its intellectual
rather than its moral aspect, call the Logos of God, it will prove, as
in so many generations past it has proved, an "incorruptible seed," a
"word of good tidings preached unto" the world, a "word of the Lord that
abideth for ever."




BIBLIOGRAPHY


1. General Introductions to N.T. Literature.

    MOFFATT, JAS. _"Internat. Theol. Library" Series._ Scribner's, 1911.
    Standard, comprehensive, progressive. Best compendium of the subject
    in English. A book for experts. 671 pp., 8vo.

    JÜLICHER, A. Engl. transl, by D. A. Ward, from 4th German ed.
    London, Smith, Elder & Co., 1903. The most serviceable of modern
    German Introductions, based on the standard work of the "liberal"
    school, by H. J. Holtzmann. 650 pp., large 8vo.

    ZAHN, THEO. Engl. transl. from 3rd German ed., by M. W. Jacobus.
    Scribner's, 1909. Standard "conservative" work. Immense scholarship
    in the harness of apologetics. Total, 1750 pp., in 3 vols., large
    8vo.

    BACON, B. W. _"New Test. Handbook" Series._ Macmillan 1900. Similar
    to Moffatt's in standpoint, but without the survey of the
    literature. For readers less technically advanced. 300 pp., small
    8vo.

    PEAKE, A. S. N.Y., Scribner's, 1910. 250 pp., 12mo. An excellent
    primer of the subject, generally conservative.


2. Critical Treatments of Pauline Literature.

    SHAW, R. D. _The Pauline Epistles, Introductory and Expository
    Studies_, 2nd ed. T. & T. Clarke, 1904. 518 pp., large 8vo. Sober
    and cautious. For general readers.

    RAMSAY, W. M. _Pauline and other Studies in Early Christian
    History._ Hodder & Stoughton, 1906. 425 pp., large 8vo. _The Cities
    of St. Paul_ (1907, 468 pp.) is by the same author, an eminent
    geographer and archaeologist ardently enlisted against German
    criticism. Interesting but diffuse.

    PFLEIDERER, O. _Paulinism._ Engl. transl. by E. Peters. 2nd ed.
    1891. Williams & Norgate. 2 vols. 8vo. Total, 580 pp., 8vo. Still a
    standard exposition of Paul's system of thought. A book for experts.

    BAUR, F. C. _Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, his Life and Work,
    Epistles and Doctrine._ Engl. transl. of Zeller's (2nd), German ed.,
    by A. Menzies. Williams & Norgate, 1876. Two vols. 8vo (375 + 350
    pp.). An epoch-making book, the starting-point of modern criticism.

    SCHWEITZER, A. This able, though one-sided, critic has issued
    already (1912) the conclusion to his study of modern Lives of Christ
    (see below, _The Quest of the Historical Jesus_) under the title
    _Geschichte der Paulinischen Forschung_. It may be expected that
    this comprehensive survey and searching criticism of the literature
    of Pauline study will soon be made accessible to the English reader.

    WREDE, W. _Paul._ Engl. transl. by E. Lummis. P. Green, London,
    1907. 190 pp., 12mo. A brief, brilliant, popular sketch, radical,
    suggestive. Needs the balance of more cautious criticism.

    WEISS, J. _Paul and Jesus._ Engl. transl. by H. J. Chaytor. London
    and New York, Harper & Bros., 1909. 130 pp., 12mo. An effective
    answer to Wrede's view of Paul as the real creator of Christianity,
    by a progressive and able critic.

    Lives of Paul by Cone, Clemen (German) and others are abundant in
    recent years. See the _Encyclopaedias_ and _Dictionaries of the
    Bible_, s.v. "Paul."


3. Critical Treatments of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts.

    STANTON, V. H. _The Gospels as Historical Documents_, Parts I and
    II. Cambridge University Press, 1903-1909. 297 + 400 pp., 8vo. A
    standard survey of Gospel criticism from a conservative standpoint,
    the work of a scholar for scholars.

    CONE, O. _Gospel Criticism and Historical Christianity._ Putnam's,
    N.Y., 1891. 375 pp., small 8vo. Liberal, semi-popular.

    BURKITT, F. C. _The Earliest Sources for the Life of Jesus._
    Houghton & Mifflin, Boston and New York, 1910. 130 pp., 12mo. Simple
    and popular. Burkitt is a leading progressive scholar.


4. The Johannine Writings.

    DRUMMOND, JAS. _Character and Authorship of the Fourth Gospel._
    Scribner's, N.Y., 1904. 544 pp., 8vo. The ablest recent defence of
    the traditional authorship. Scholarly discussion of the literary
    history.

    BACON, B. W. _The Fourth Gospel in Research and Debate._ Moffat,
    Yard & Co., N.Y., 1910. 556 pp., 8vo. A similar discussion of the
    evidences reaching the reverse conclusion.

    SCOTT, E. F. _The Fourth Gospel, its Purpose and Theology._ T. & T.
    Clarke, Edinburgh, 1906. 386 pp., 8vo. Admirable in temper, lucid in
    style, semi-popular.

    SCHMIEDEL, P. W. _The Johannine Writings._ Engl. transl., by M. A.
    Canney. London, A. & C. Black, 1903. 295 pp., 12mo. Brief, popular,
    radical, by one of the ablest of N.T. critics.


General.

    REUSS, E. _History of the N.T._ Engl. transl. from 5th German ed.,
    by E. L. Houghton. Boston, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1884. 649 pp. 2
    vols. large 8vo. A standard treasury of scholarly information.

    WERNLE, P. _The Beginnings of Christianity._ Engl. transl., by G. A.
    Bienemann. London, Williams & Norgate, 1904. 388 + 404 pp., 8vo. 2
    vols. Able, scholarly, advanced.

    PFLEIDERER, O. _Christian Origins._ Engl. transl., by D. Huebsch.
    New York, B. W. Huebsch, 1906. 295 pp., 12mo. Popular lectures
    showing something of the views of the modern school of critics known
    as _religionsgeschichtlich_. Pfleiderer's critical opinions are
    fully expressed in his _Primitive Christianity_ (Engl. transl., by
    W. Montgomery, in four vols., 8vo. Putnams, 1909).

    MUZZEY, D. S. _The Rise of the N.T._ New York, Macmillan, 1900. 156
    pp., 12mo. An excellent primer for beginners.

    WREDE, W. _The Origin of the N.T._ Engl. transl. by J. S. Hill.
    Harper & Bros., London & New York, 1909. 151 pp., 12mo. An admirable
    primer by a brilliant leader of advanced criticism.

    VON SODEN. _The History of Early Christian Literature. Writings of
    the N.T._ Engl. transl., by J. R. Wilkinson. Williams & Norgate,
    1906. 476 pp., 12mo. A book for beginners by a great N.T. scholar of
    liberal views. A closely connected field is covered by various
    _Histories of the Apostolic Age_, of which the most recent and
    important are those of Weizsäcker (Engl. transl., 1895) and
    McGiffert (1897). Less technical and more orthodox are those of
    Vernon-Bartlett (1899) and J. H. Ropes (1906). _Critical Lives of
    Christ_ present the results of critical study of the Gospels. A
    survey of this field of research, keenly analytical and severely
    critical, is given by A. Schweitzer in _The Quest of the Historical
    Jesus_ (Engl. transl. by W. Montgomery. A. & C. Black, 1910. 416
    pp., 8vo). Schweitzer writes with great scholarship and power, but
    decided polemic interest as a "consistent eschatologist."




INDEX


  Abomination, 161, 218

  Acts, 57 ff., 64 ff., 174 ff.

  Agabus, 185, 202

  Allegory (in John), 224

  Angelology and demonology, 95

  Antichrist, 217 f.

  Anti-legalism (of Mark), 166

  Antinomian heresy, 149, 214

  Antioch, 71, 175 ff., 183 f.

  Apocalypses, 29, 51, 87, 188, 197

  Apostolic Christianity, 42, 126, 129, 246

  Apostolic Commission, 238 f.

  Apostolic Council, 60, 63, 67

  Apotheosis doctrine, 49

  Appendix to John, 107, 147, 211, 236 ff.

  Asia, Churches of, 197 ff.

  Athanasius, 29 f.


  Babylon (= Rome), 115, 196

  Baptist (in John), 225

  Bar Cocheba, 204

  _Baruch, Apocalypse of_ 188

  Baur, F. C., 37 ff.

  Beloved disciple, the, 227, 243 ff.


  Cæsarea, 85

  Calvin, 37

  Canonization of the Law, 12

  Cerinthus, 219

  Chiliasts, 187

  Christological Epistles, 97

  Christ-party, 45

  Clement of Rome, 19 f., 79, 115, 119

  Clement of Alexandria, 25

  _Clementine Homilies and Recognitions_, 148

  Colossians, 98

  Corinthian Epistles, 76 ff.


  Decrees of Jerusalem, 60

  Diary of Acts, 183

  Dionysius of Alexandria, 191

  Disputed books, 30

  Doketism, 21, 110, 126, 153, 163, 184, 186, 214, 217, 219


  Elder (of 2nd and 3rd John), 215

  Elements, 76, 99

  Ephesians, 98

  Ephesus, 76, 97, 111 f., 191, 201, 211

  Epiphanius, 131

  Epistles (Major), 43

  Epistles of the Captivity, 42, 85, 100

  Eschatological discourse, 161

  Esdras (Apocalypse of), 188

  External evidence, 38


  False brethren, 41

  Feasts (in John), 226

  Fornication, 60, 77


  Gaius (3rd John), 215 f.

  Gaius of Rome, 31, 237

  Galatians, 56, 74

  Gentile liberty, 61 ff.

  Gnosticism, 40, 108, 207 f.

  _Gospel according to the Hebrews_, 135, 145

  _Gospel of the Nazarenes_, 132, 145 ff., 236


  Harnack, 98

  Hebrews, 107, 116 ff.

  Hebrews, Apostolic authority in, 18

  Hebrews, Canonical standing of, 31

  Hegesippus, 105 f., 111

  Hellenistic religion, 247

  Hermas, 21, 28, 119 f., 237


  Ignatius, 20 f., 23, 111, 124, 126, 208

  Incarnation Doctrine, 49, 154, 229, 231

  Infancy of Jesus (in Matthew and Luke), 152

  Internal evidence, 38

  Irenæus, 81, 133, 219


  James, 104 ff., 107, 112 f., 130

  Jerusalem Conference, 67, 71

  Jerusalem succession, 105 f., 119

  John, the Apostle, a martyr, 104, 194, 243

  John, Gospel of, 25, 31, 43, 54, 206 ff.

  John, Revelation of, 30, 43, 63, 107, 131, 187, 189 ff., 235

  John, Epistles of, 43, 111, 126, 211 ff.

  John, _Acts of_, 219 f.

  John, the Elder, 26, 131, 133, 236

  Josephus (used by Luke), 174

  Judaism _v._ Hellenism, 52 f.

  Judaizers, 68

  Jude, 19, 80, 107, 130

  Justin Martyr, 187, 190, 235 f.


  Kindred of the Lord, 164 f.


  Laodiceans, 98

  Law _v._ grace, 8, 14, 66, 74, 81, 123

  _Logia_, 136, 141

  Logos-doctrine, 55, 221, 232

  Lordship (of Christ), 96

  Luke, 27, 139, 173 f.

  Luke, his omissions from Mark, 178 f.

  Luke, his purpose in writing, 180 f.

  Luther, 37


  Magic, 93 ff.

  Marcion, 22 ff., 40

  Mark, 129, 134, 159 ff.

  Mark, Duplication in, 172

  Mark, Endings of, 168 ff., 235 f.

  Matthew, 131 ff., 187

  Melito of Sardis, 19, 190

  Michælis, 35

  Missionary Journey, First, 58 f.

  Missionary Journey, Second, 72

  Moffatt, Jas., 151

  Montanus, 28 f.

  Muratorian Fragment, 30, 234


  Nepos, the Chiliast, 191


  Offering for the poor, 69


  Palestine, Origin of Revelations, 195 ff.

  Papias, 26, 105 f., 130 f., 186 f., 190, 208

  Parables (in Matthew), 149 f.

  Passover, 101, 173

  Pastoral Epistles, 19, 31, 83, 108, 111, 123

  Patmos, 191, 200 f.

  Paul, Original Apostle of Asia, 205

  Paul, his religious experience, 16

  Paul, martyrdom, 105

  Pauline _v._ Petrine gospel, 49

  Paulinism of Mark, 162

  Persecution, 13, 122

  Peter (the Apostle), 24, 26, 106, 133, 146

  Peter, _Apocalypse of_, 29 f.

  Peter, Commission of, 240 f.

  Peter, Epistles of, 41, 108 f., 112 ff.

  Peter, _Gospel of_, 171, 221, 236

  Peter, _Preaching of_, 139

  Pharisaic Judaism, 121

  Philemon, 88

  Philip, Daughters of, 185 f.

  Philippians, 89 ff.

  Phrygian heresy, 28

  _Pirke Aboth_, 141

  Polycarp, 26, 110, 130, 186, 218

  Porphyry, 106

  Post-Reformation dogma, 33 f.

  Precepts (of Jesus), 137

  Prologue (of John), 231

  Prophecy, 188 f., 209


  Q-material, 141 ff.


  Reconciliation with God, 103

  Redeemer-gods, 50

  Redemption doctrines, 86, 93

  Reformation, 37

  Repentance (the Great), 156 f.

  Resurrection-doctrine, 73, 78, 125, 155, 158, 204, 210

  Revelation (_See_ John, Revelation of)

  Romans, 75, 80 ff.

  Rome, 120, 129


  Satan, Dominion of, 157

  Scripture, Use in Paul, 17

  Scripture, Use in John, 25

  Second Coming, 230

  Sermon on Mount, 9

  Signs in Fourth gospel, 223

  Simon, Richard, 35

  Spirit, Doctrine of the, 17, 67, 101 156, 220

  Subscriptions, 233

  Superstitious Judaism, 93 f.

  Symeon, son of Clopas, 105

  Synoptic writings, 44, 107

  Synoptic writings in John, 228

  Syria and Cilicia, 61, 129


  _Teaching of the Twelve_, 28, 63, 185

  Tertullian, 19, 29

  Thessalonian Epistles, 73

  Timothy (_See_ Pastoral Epistles), 78

  Titus (_See_ Pastoral Epistles)

  Transfiguration, 165, 167, 228, 230

  Tübingen School, 43 ff.


  Unity of the Church, 70, 103, 120

  Unity of the N.T., 248


  Way (= sect), 8

  Weak (party of the), 45

  Wisdom of God, 99, 209, 229

  Wisdom of Solomon (Sap.), 51

  Words of Jesus, 19, 129 f., 144 f.


  Zahn, 115




_Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London and Bungay._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Making of the New Testament, by 
Benjamin W. Bacon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ***

***** This file should be named 39288-8.txt or 39288-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/8/39288/

Produced by David Edwards, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Rome, Turkey, and Jerusalem, by Edward Hoare


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Rome, Turkey, and Jerusalem


Author: Edward Hoare



Release Date: March 28, 2012  [eBook #39290]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROME, TURKEY, AND JERUSALEM***


Transcribed from the 1876 H. Colbran edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                              ROME, TURKEY,
                                   AND
                                JERUSALEM.


                                * * * * *

                          BY THE REV. E. HOARE,
                    VICAR OF TRINITY, TUNBRIDGE WELLS,
                    AND HONORARY CANON OF CANTERBURY.

                                * * * * *

                            _SECOND EDITION_.

                                * * * * *
