alive yesterday evening, wasn't he? How could you sleep here after
that?" she cried, growing suddenly animated.

"Oh, but he didn't kill himself; the pistol didn't go off." Aglaya
insisted on hearing the whole story. She hurried the prince along, but
interrupted him with all sorts of questions, nearly all of which were
irrelevant. Among other things, she seemed greatly interested in every
word that Evgenie Pavlovitch had said, and made the prince repeat that
part of the story over and over again.

"Well, that'll do; we must be quick," she concluded, after hearing all.
"We have only an hour here, till eight; I must be home by then without
fail, so that they may not find out that I came and sat here with you;
but I've come on business. I have a great deal to say to you. But you
have bowled me over considerably with your news. As to Hippolyte, I
think his pistol was bound not to go off; it was more consistent with
the whole affair. Are you sure he really wished to blow his brains out,
and that there was no humbug about the matter?"

"No humbug at all."

"Very likely. So he wrote that you were to bring me a copy of his
confession, did he? Why didn't you bring it?"

"Why, he didn't die! I'll ask him for it, if you like."

"Bring it by all means; you needn't ask him. He will be delighted, you
may be sure; for, in all probability, he shot at himself simply in order
that I might read his confession. Don't laugh at what I say, please, Lef
Nicolaievitch, because it may very well be the case."

"I'm not laughing. I am convinced, myself, that that may have been
partly the reason.

"You are convinced? You don't really mean to say you think that
honestly?" asked Aglaya, extremely surprised.

She put her questions very quickly and talked fast, every now and then
forgetting what she had begun to say, and not finishing her sentence.
She seemed to be impatient to warn the prince about something or other.
She was in a state of unusual excitement, and though she put on a brave
and even defiant air, she seemed to be rather alarmed. She was dressed
very simply, but this suited her well. She continually trembled and
blushed, and she sat on the very edge of the seat.

The fact that the prince confirmed her idea, about Hippolyte shooting
himself that she might read his confession, surprised her greatly.

"Of course," added the prince, "he wished us all to applaud his
conduct--besides yourself."

"How do you mean--applaud?"

"Well--how am I to explain? He was very anxious that we should all come
around him, and say we were so sorry for him, and that we loved him
very much, and all that; and that we hoped he wouldn't kill himself, but
remain alive. Very likely he thought more of you than the rest of us,
because he mentioned you at such a moment, though perhaps he did not
know himself that he had you in his mind's eye."

"I don't understand you. How could he have me in view, and not be aware
of it himself? And yet, I don't know--perhaps I do. Do you know I
have intended to poison myself at least thirty times--ever since I was
thirteen or so--and to write to my parents before I did it? I used
to think how nice it would be to lie in my coffin, and have them all
weeping over me and saying it was all their fault for being so cruel,
and all that--what are you smiling at?" she added, knitting her brow.
"What do YOU think of when you go mooning about alone? I suppose
you imagine yourself a field-marshal, and think you have conquered
Napoleon?"

"Well, I really have thought something of the sort now and then,
especially when just dozing off," laughed the prince. "Only it is the
Austrians whom I conquer--not Napoleon."

"I don't wish to joke with you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I shall see Hippolyte
myself. Tell him so. As for you, I think you are behaving very badly,
because it is not right to judge a man's soul as you are judging
Hippolyte's. You have no gentleness, but only justice--so you are
unjust."

The prince reflected.

"I think you are unfair towards me," he said. "There is nothing wrong
in the thoughts I ascribe to Hippolyte; they are only natural. But of
course I don't know for certain what he thought. Perhaps he thought
nothing, but simply longed to see human faces once more, and to hear
human praise and feel human affection. Who knows? Only it all came out
wrong, somehow. Some people have luck, and everything comes out right
with them; others have none, and never a thing turns out fortunately."

"I suppose you have felt that in your own case," said Aglaya.

"Yes, I have," replied the prince, quite unsuspicious of any irony in
the remark.

"H'm--well, at all events, I shouldn't have fallen asleep here, in your
place. It wasn't nice of you, that. I suppose you fall asleep wherever
you sit down?"

"But I didn't sleep a wink all night. I walked and walked about, and
went to where the music was--"

"What music?"

"Where they played last night. Then I found this bench and sat down, and
thought and thought--and at last I fell fast asleep."

"Oh, is that it? That makes a difference, perhaps. What did you go to
the bandstand for?"

"I don't know; I---"

"Very well--afterwards. You are always interrupting me. What woman was
it you were dreaming about?"

"It was--about--you saw her--"

"Quite so; I understand. I understand quite well. You are very--Well,
how did she appear to you? What did she look like? No, I don't want to
know anything about her," said Aglaya, angrily; "don't interrupt me--"

She paused a moment as though getting breath, or trying to master her
feeling of annoyance.

"Look here; this is what I called you here for. I wish to make you a--to
ask you to be my friend. What do you stare at me like that for?" she
added, almost angrily.

The prince certainly had darted a rather piercing look at her, and now
observed that she had begun to blush violently. At such moments, the
more Aglaya blushed, the angrier she grew with herself; and this was
clearly expressed in her eyes, which flashed like fire. As a rule, she
vented her wrath on her unfortunate companion, be it who it might. She
was very conscious of her own shyness, and was not nearly so talkative
as her sisters for this reason--in fact, at times she was much too
quiet. When, therefore, she was bound to talk, especially at such
delicate moments as this, she invariably did so with an air of haughty
defiance. She always knew beforehand when she was going to blush, long
before the blush came.

"Perhaps you do not wish to accept my proposition?" she asked, gazing
haughtily at the prince.

"Oh yes, I do; but it is so unnecessary. I mean, I did not think you
need make such a proposition," said the prince, looking confused.

"What did you suppose, then? Why did you think I invited you out here? I
suppose you think me a 'little fool,' as they all call me at home?"

"I didn't know they called you a fool. I certainly don't think you one."

"You don't think me one! Oh, dear me!--that's very clever of you; you
put it so neatly, too."

"In my opinion, you are far from a fool sometimes--in fact, you are very
intelligent. You said a very clever thing just now about my being unjust
because I had ONLY justice. I shall remember that, and think about it."

Aglaya blushed with pleasure. All these changes in her expression came
about so naturally and so rapidly--they delighted the prince; he watched
her, and laughed.

"Listen," she began again; "I have long waited to tell you all this,
ever since the time when you sent me that letter--even before that.
Half of what I have to say you heard yesterday. I consider you the most
honest and upright of men--more honest and upright than any other
man; and if anybody says that your mind is--is sometimes affected, you
know--it is unfair. I always say so and uphold it, because even if your
surface mind be a little affected (of course you will not feel angry
with me for talking so--I am speaking from a higher point of view) yet
your real mind is far better than all theirs put together. Such a
mind as they have never even DREAMED of; because really, there are TWO
minds--the kind that matters, and the kind that doesn't matter. Isn't it
so?"

"May be! may be so!" said the prince, faintly; his heart was beating
painfully.

"I knew you would not misunderstand me," she said, triumphantly. "Prince
S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and Alexandra don't understand anything about
these two kinds of mind, but, just fancy, mamma does!"

"You are very like Lizabetha Prokofievna."

"What! surely not?" said Aglaya.

"Yes, you are, indeed."

"Thank you; I am glad to be like mamma," she said, thoughtfully. "You
respect her very much, don't you?" she added, quite unconscious of the
naiveness of the question.

"VERY much; and I am so glad that you have realized the fact."

"I am very glad, too, because she is often laughed at by people. But
listen to the chief point. I have long thought over the matter, and at
last I have chosen you. I don't wish people to laugh at me; I don't wish
people to think me a 'little fool.' I don't want to be chaffed. I felt
all this of a sudden, and I refused Evgenie Pavlovitch flatly, because
I am not going to be forever thrown at people's heads to be married. I
want--I want--well, I'll tell you, I wish to run away from home, and I
have chosen you to help me."

"Run away from home?" cried the prince.

"Yes--yes--yes! Run away from home!" she repeated, in a transport of
rage. "I won't, I won't be made to blush every minute by them all! I
don't want to blush before Prince S. or Evgenie Pavlovitch, or
anyone, and therefore I have chosen you. I shall tell you everything,
EVERYTHING, even the most important things of all, whenever I like,
and you are to hide nothing from me on your side. I want to speak to at
least one person, as I would to myself. They have suddenly begun to say
that I am waiting for you, and in love with you. They began this before
you arrived here, and so I didn't show them the letter, and now they all
say it, every one of them. I want to be brave, and be afraid of nobody.
I don't want to go to their balls and things--I want to do good. I have
long desired to run away, for I have been kept shut up for twenty years,
and they are always trying to marry me off. I wanted to run away when I
was fourteen years old--I was a little fool then, I know--but now I have
worked it all out, and I have waited for you to tell me about foreign
countries. I have never seen a single Gothic cathedral. I must go to
Rome; I must see all the museums; I must study in Paris. All this last
year I have been preparing and reading forbidden books. Alexandra and
Adelaida are allowed to read anything they like, but I mayn't. I don't
want to quarrel with my sisters, but I told my parents long ago that I
wish to change my social position. I have decided to take up teaching,
and I count on you because you said you loved children. Can we go in for
education together--if not at once, then afterwards? We could do good
together. I won't be a general's daughter any more! Tell me, are you a
very learned man?"

"Oh no; not at all."

"Oh-h-h! I'm sorry for that. I thought you were. I wonder why I always
thought so--but at all events you'll help me, won't you? Because I've
chosen you, you know."

"Aglaya Ivanovna, it's absurd."

"But I will, I WILL run away!" she cried--and her eyes flashed again
with anger--"and if you don't agree I shall go and marry Gavrila
Ardalionovitch! I won't be considered a horrible girl, and accused of
goodness knows what."

"Are you out of your mind?" cried the prince, almost starting from his
seat. "What do they accuse you of? Who accuses you?"

"At home, everybody, mother, my sisters, Prince S., even that detestable
Colia! If they don't say it, they think it. I told them all so to their
faces. I told mother and father and everybody. Mamma was ill all the
day after it, and next day father and Alexandra told me that I didn't
understand what nonsense I was talking. I informed them that they
little knew me--I was not a small child--I understood every word in the
language--that I had read a couple of Paul de Kok's novels two years
since on purpose, so as to know all about everything. No sooner did
mamma hear me say this than she nearly fainted!"

A strange thought passed through the prince's brain; he gazed intently
at Aglaya and smiled.

He could not believe that this was the same haughty young girl who had
once so proudly shown him Gania's letter. He could not understand how
that proud and austere beauty could show herself to be such an utter
child--a child who probably did not even now understand some words.

"Have you always lived at home, Aglaya Ivanovna?" he asked. "I mean,
have you never been to school, or college, or anything?"

"No--never--nowhere! I've been at home all my life, corked up in a
bottle; and they expect me to be married straight out of it. What are
you laughing at again? I observe that you, too, have taken to laughing
at me, and range yourself on their side against me," she added, frowning
angrily. "Don't irritate me--I'm bad enough without that--I don't know
what I am doing sometimes. I am persuaded that you came here today in
the full belief that I am in love with you, and that I arranged this
meeting because of that," she cried, with annoyance.

"I admit I was afraid that that was the case, yesterday," blundered the
prince (he was rather confused), "but today I am quite convinced that--"

"How?" cried Aglaya--and her lower lip trembled violently. "You were
AFRAID that I--you dared to think that I--good gracious! you suspected,
perhaps, that I sent for you to come here in order to catch you in a
trap, so that they should find us here together, and make you marry
me--"

"Aglaya Ivanovna, aren't you ashamed of saying such a thing? How could
such a horrible idea enter your sweet, innocent heart? I am certain you
don't believe a word of what you say, and probably you don't even know
what you are talking about."

Aglaya sat with her eyes on the ground; she seemed to have alarmed even
herself by what she had said.

"No, I'm not; I'm not a bit ashamed!" she murmured. "And how do you
know my heart is innocent? And how dared you send me a love--letter that
time?"

"LOVE-LETTER? My letter a love-letter? That letter was the most
respectful of letters; it went straight from my heart, at what was
perhaps the most painful moment of my life! I thought of you at the time
as a kind of light. I--"

"Well, very well, very well!" she said, but quite in a different tone.
She was remorseful now, and bent forward to touch his shoulder, though
still trying not to look him in the face, as if the more persuasively
to beg him not to be angry with her. "Very well," she continued, looking
thoroughly ashamed of herself, "I feel that I said a very foolish thing.
I only did it just to try you. Take it as unsaid, and if I offended you,
forgive me. Don't look straight at me like that, please; turn your head
away. You called it a 'horrible idea'; I only said it to shock you.
Very often I am myself afraid of saying what I intend to say, and out it
comes all the same. You have just told me that you wrote that letter at
the most painful moment of your life. I know what moment that was!" she
added softly, looking at the ground again.

"Oh, if you could know all!"

"I DO know all!" she cried, with another burst of indignation. "You were
living in the same house as that horrible woman with whom you ran away."
She did not blush as she said this; on the contrary, she grew pale,
and started from her seat, apparently oblivious of what she did, and
immediately sat down again. Her lip continued to tremble for a long
time.

There was silence for a moment. The prince was taken aback by the
suddenness of this last reply, and did not know to what he should
attribute it.

"I don't love you a bit!" she said suddenly, just as though the words
had exploded from her mouth.

The prince did not answer, and there was silence again. "I love Gavrila
Ardalionovitch," she said, quickly; but hardly audibly, and with her
head bent lower than ever.

"That is NOT true," said the prince, in an equally low voice.

"What! I tell stories, do I? It is true! I gave him my promise a couple
of days ago on this very seat."

The prince was startled, and reflected for a moment.

"It is not true," he repeated, decidedly; "you have just invented it!"

"You are wonderfully polite. You know he is greatly improved. He loves
me better than his life. He let his hand burn before my very eyes in
order to prove to me that he loved me better than his life!"

"He burned his hand!"

"Yes, believe it or not! It's all the same to me!"

The prince sat silent once more. Aglaya did not seem to be joking; she
was too angry for that.

"What! he brought a candle with him to this place? That is, if the
episode happened here; otherwise I can't."

"Yes, a candle! What's there improbable about that?"

"A whole one, and in a candlestick?"

"Yes--no-half a candle--an end, you know--no, it was a whole candle;
it's all the same. Be quiet, can't you! He brought a box of matches too,
if you like, and then lighted the candle and held his finger in it for
half an hour and more!--There! Can't that be?"

"I saw him yesterday, and his fingers were all right!"

Aglaya suddenly burst out laughing, as simply as a child.

"Do you know why I have just told you these lies?" She appealed to the
prince, of a sudden, with the most childlike candour, and with the
laugh still trembling on her lips. "Because when one tells a lie, if one
insists on something unusual and eccentric--something too 'out of the
way'' for anything, you know--the more impossible the thing is, the more
plausible does the lie sound. I've noticed this. But I managed it badly;
I didn't know how to work it." She suddenly frowned again at this point
as though at some sudden unpleasant recollection.

"If"--she began, looking seriously and even sadly at him--"if when I
read you all that about the 'poor knight,' I wished to-to praise you
for one thing--I also wished to show you that I knew all--and did not
approve of your conduct."

"You are very unfair to me, and to that unfortunate woman of whom you
spoke just now in such dreadful terms, Aglaya."

"Because I know all, all--and that is why I speak so. I know very well
how you--half a year since--offered her your hand before everybody.
Don't interrupt me. You see, I am merely stating facts without any
comment upon them. After that she ran away with Rogojin. Then you lived
with her at some village or town, and she ran away from you." (Aglaya
blushed dreadfully.) "Then she returned to Rogojin again, who loves
her like a madman. Then you--like a wise man as you are--came back here
after her as soon as ever you heard that she had returned to Petersburg.
Yesterday evening you sprang forward to protect her, and just now you
dreamed about her. You see, I know all. You did come back here for her,
for her--now didn't you?"

"Yes--for her!" said the prince softly and sadly, and bending his head
down, quite unconscious of the fact that Aglaya was gazing at him with
eyes which burned like live coals. "I came to find out something--I
don't believe in her future happiness as Rogojin's wife, although--in a
word, I did not know how to help her or what to do for her--but I came,
on the chance."

He glanced at Aglaya, who was listening with a look of hatred on her
face.

"If you came without knowing why, I suppose you love her very much
indeed!" she said at last.

"No," said the prince, "no, I do not love her. Oh! if you only knew with
what horror I recall the time I spent with her!"

A shudder seemed to sweep over his whole body at the recollection.

"Tell me about it," said Aglaya.

"There is nothing which you might not hear. Why I should wish to tell
you, and only you, this experience of mine, I really cannot say;
perhaps it really is because I love you very much. This unhappy woman is
persuaded that she is the most hopeless, fallen creature in the world.
Oh, do not condemn her! Do not cast stones at her! She has suffered too
much already in the consciousness of her own undeserved shame.

"And she is not guilty--oh God!--Every moment she bemoans and bewails
herself, and cries out that she does not admit any guilt, that she is
the victim of circumstances--the victim of a wicked libertine.

"But whatever she may say, remember that she does not believe it
herself,--remember that she will believe nothing but that she is a
guilty creature.

"When I tried to rid her soul of this gloomy fallacy, she suffered so
terribly that my heart will never be quite at peace so long as I can
remember that dreadful time!--Do you know why she left me? Simply to
prove to me what is not true--that she is base. But the worst of it is,
she did not realize herself that that was all she wanted to prove by
her departure! She went away in response to some inner prompting to
do something disgraceful, in order that she might say to
herself--'There--you've done a new act of shame--you degraded creature!'

"Oh, Aglaya--perhaps you cannot understand all this. Try to realize that
in the perpetual admission of guilt she probably finds some dreadful
unnatural satisfaction--as though she were revenging herself upon
someone.

"Now and then I was able to persuade her almost to see light around
her again; but she would soon fall, once more, into her old tormenting
delusions, and would go so far as to reproach me for placing myself on a
pedestal above her (I never had an idea of such a thing!), and informed
me, in reply to my proposal of marriage, that she 'did not want
condescending sympathy or help from anybody.' You saw her last night.
You don't suppose she can be happy among such people as those--you
cannot suppose that such society is fit for her? You have no idea how
well-educated she is, and what an intellect she has! She astonished me
sometimes."

"And you preached her sermons there, did you?"

"Oh no," continued the prince thoughtfully, not noticing Aglaya's
mocking tone, "I was almost always silent there. I often wished to
speak, but I really did not know what to say. In some cases it is best
to say nothing, I think. I loved her, yes, I loved her very much indeed;
but afterwards--afterwards she guessed all."

"What did she guess?"

"That I only PITIED her--and--and loved her no longer!"

"How do you know that? How do you know that she is not really in love
with that--that rich cad--the man she eloped with?"

"Oh no! I know she only laughs at him; she has made a fool of him all
along."

"Has she never laughed at you?"

"No--in anger, perhaps. Oh yes! she reproached me dreadfully in anger;
and suffered herself, too! But afterwards--oh! don't remind me--don't
remind me of that!"

He hid his face in his hands.

"Are you aware that she writes to me almost every day?"

"So that is true, is it?" cried the prince, greatly agitated. "I had
heard a report of it, but would not believe it."

"Whom did you hear it from?" asked Aglaya, alarmed. "Rogojin said
something about it yesterday, but nothing definite."

"Yesterday! Morning or evening? Before the music or after?"

"After--it was about twelve o'clock."

"Ah! Well, if it was Rogojin--but do you know what she writes to me
about?"

"I should not be surprised by anything. She is mad!"

"There are the letters." (Aglaya took three letters out of her pocket
and threw them down before the prince.) "For a whole week she has been
entreating and worrying and persuading me to marry you. She--well, she
is clever, though she may be mad--much cleverer than I am, as you say.
Well, she writes that she is in love with me herself, and tries to see
me every day, if only from a distance. She writes that you love me,
and that she has long known it and seen it, and that you and she talked
about me--there. She wishes to see you happy, and she says that she is
certain only I can ensure you the happiness you deserve. She writes such
strange, wild letters--I haven't shown them to anyone. Now, do you know
what all this means? Can you guess anything?"

"It is madness--it is merely another proof of her insanity!" said the
prince, and his lips trembled.

"You are crying, aren't you?"

"No, Aglaya. No, I'm not crying." The prince looked at her.

"Well, what am I to do? What do you advise me? I cannot go on receiving
these letters, you know."

"Oh, let her alone, I entreat you!" cried the prince. "What can you do in
this dark, gloomy mystery? Let her alone, and I'll use all my power to
prevent her writing you any more letters."

"If so, you are a heartless man!" cried Aglaya. "As if you can't see that
it is not myself she loves, but you, you, and only you! Surely you have
not remarked everything else in her, and only not THIS? Do you know what
these letters mean? They mean jealousy, sir--nothing but pure jealousy!
She--do you think she will ever really marry this Rogojin, as she says
here she will? She would take her own life the day after you and I were
married."

The prince shuddered; his heart seemed to freeze within him. He gazed
at Aglaya in wonderment; it was difficult for him to realize that this
child was also a woman.

"God knows, Aglaya, that to restore her peace of mind and make her happy
I would willingly give up my life. But I cannot love her, and she knows
that."

"Oh, make a sacrifice of yourself! That sort of thing becomes you well,
you know. Why not do it? And don't call me 'Aglaya'; you have done it
several times lately. You are bound, it is your DUTY to 'raise' her; you
must go off somewhere again to soothe and pacify her. Why, you love her,
you know!"

"I cannot sacrifice myself so, though I admit I did wish to do so once.
Who knows, perhaps I still wish to! But I know for CERTAIN, that if she
married me it would be her ruin; I know this and therefore I leave her
alone. I ought to go to see her today; now I shall probably not go. She
is proud, she would never forgive me the nature of the love I bear her,
and we should both be ruined. This may be unnatural, I don't know; but
everything seems unnatural. You say she loves me, as if this were LOVE!
As if she could love ME, after what I have been through! No, no, it is
not love."

"How pale you have grown!" cried Aglaya in alarm.

"Oh, it's nothing. I haven't slept, that's all, and I'm rather tired.
I--we certainly did talk about you, Aglaya."

"Oh, indeed, it is true then! _You could actually talk about me with her_;
and--and how could you have been fond of me when you had only seen me
once?"

"I don't know. Perhaps it was that I seemed to come upon light in the
midst of my gloom. I told you the truth when I said I did not know why I
thought of you before all others. Of course it was all a sort of dream,
a dream amidst the horrors of reality. Afterwards I began to work. I did
not intend to come back here for two or three years--"

"Then you came for her sake?" Aglaya's voice trembled.

"Yes, I came for her sake."

There was a moment or two of gloomy silence. Aglaya rose from her seat.

"If you say," she began in shaky tones, "if you say that this woman
of yours is mad--at all events I have nothing to do with her insane
fancies. Kindly take these three letters, Lef Nicolaievitch, and throw
them back to her, from me. And if she dares," cried Aglaya suddenly,
much louder than before, "if she dares so much as write me one word
again, tell her I shall tell my father, and that she shall be taken to a
lunatic asylum."

The prince jumped up in alarm at Aglaya's sudden wrath, and a mist
seemed to come before his eyes.

"You cannot really feel like that! You don't mean what you say. It is
not true," he murmured.

"It IS true, it IS true," cried Aglaya, almost beside herself with rage.

"What's true? What's all this? What's true?" said an alarmed voice just
beside them.

Before them stood Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"Why, it's true that I am going to marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch, that I
love him and intend to elope with him tomorrow," cried Aglaya, turning
upon her mother. "Do you hear? Is your curiosity satisfied? Are you
pleased with what you have heard?"

Aglaya rushed away homewards with these words.

"H'm! well, YOU are not going away just yet, my friend, at all events,"
said Lizabetha, stopping the prince. "Kindly step home with me, and let
me have a little explanation of the mystery. Nice goings on, these! I
haven't slept a wink all night as it is."

The prince followed her.

IX.

ARRIVED at her house, Lizabetha Prokofievna paused in the first room.
She could go no farther, and subsided on to a couch quite exhausted; too
feeble to remember so much as to ask the prince to take a seat. This was
a large reception-room, full of flowers, and with a glass door leading
into the garden.

Alexandra and Adelaida came in almost immediately, and looked
inquiringly at the prince and their mother.

The girls generally rose at about nine in the morning in the country;
Aglaya, of late, had been in the habit of getting up rather earlier and
having a walk in the garden, but not at seven o'clock; about eight or a
little later was her usual time.

Lizabetha Prokofievna, who really had not slept all night, rose at about
eight on purpose to meet Aglaya in the garden and walk with her; but she
could not find her either in the garden or in her own room.

This agitated the old lady considerably; and she awoke her other
daughters. Next, she learned from the maid that Aglaya had gone into
the park before seven o'clock. The sisters made a joke of Aglaya's last
freak, and told their mother that if she went into the park to look
for her, Aglaya would probably be very angry with her, and that she was
pretty sure to be sitting reading on the green bench that she had talked
of two or three days since, and about which she had nearly quarrelled
with Prince S., who did not see anything particularly lovely in it.

Arrived at the rendezvous of the prince and her daughter, and hearing
the strange words of the latter, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
dreadfully alarmed, for many reasons. However, now that she had dragged
the prince home with her, she began to feel a little frightened at what
she had undertaken. Why should not Aglaya meet the prince in the
park and have a talk with him, even if such a meeting should be by
appointment?

"Don't suppose, prince," she began, bracing herself up for the effort,
"don't suppose that I have brought you here to ask questions. After last
night, I assure you, I am not so exceedingly anxious to see you at all;
I could have postponed the pleasure for a long while." She paused.

"But at the same time you would be very glad to know how I happened to
meet Aglaya Ivanovna this morning?" The prince finished her speech for
her with the utmost composure.

"Well, what then? Supposing I should like to know?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, blushing. "I'm sure I am not afraid of plain speaking. I'm
not offending anyone, and I never wish to, and--"

"Pardon me, it is no offence to wish to know this; you are her
mother. We met at the green bench this morning, punctually at seven
o'clock,--according to an agreement made by Aglaya Ivanovna with myself
yesterday. She said that she wished to see me and speak to me about
something important. We met and conversed for an hour about matters
concerning Aglaya Ivanovna herself, and that's all."

"Of course it is all, my friend. I don't doubt you for a moment," said
Lizabetha Prokofievna with dignity.

"Well done, prince, capital!" cried Aglaya, who entered the room at
this moment. "Thank you for assuming that I would not demean myself
with lies. Come, is that enough, mamma, or do you intend to put any more
questions?"

"You know I have never needed to blush before you, up to this day,
though perhaps you would have been glad enough to make me," said
Lizabetha Prokofievna,--with majesty. "Good-bye, prince; forgive me for
bothering you. I trust you will rest assured of my unalterable esteem
for you."

The prince made his bows and retired at once. Alexandra and Adelaida
smiled and whispered to each other, while Lizabetha Prokofievna glared
severely at them. "We are only laughing at the prince's beautiful bows,
mamma," said Adelaida. "Sometimes he bows just like a meal-sack, but
to-day he was like--like Evgenie Pavlovitch!"

"It is the HEART which is the best teacher of refinement and dignity,
not the dancing-master," said her mother, sententiously, and departed
upstairs to her own room, not so much as glancing at Aglaya.

When the prince reached home, about nine o'clock, he found Vera Lebedeff
and the maid on the verandah. They were both busy trying to tidy up the
place after last night's disorderly party.

"Thank goodness, we've just managed to finish it before you came in!"
said Vera, joyfully.

"Good-morning! My head whirls so; I didn't sleep all night. I should
like to have a nap now."

"Here, on the verandah? Very well, I'll tell them all not to come and
wake you. Papa has gone out somewhere."

The servant left the room. Vera was about to follow her, but returned
and approached the prince with a preoccupied air.

"Prince!" she said, "have pity on that poor boy; don't turn him out
today."

"Not for the world; he shall do just as he likes."

"He won't do any harm now; and--and don't be too severe with him."

"Oh dear no! Why--"

"And--and you won't LAUGH at him? That's the chief thing."

"Oh no! Never."

"How foolish I am to speak of such things to a man like you," said Vera,
blushing. "Though you _do_ look tired," she added, half turning away,
"your eyes are so splendid at this moment--so full of happiness."

"Really?" asked the prince, gleefully, and he laughed in delight.

But Vera, simple-minded little girl that she was (just like a boy, in
fact), here became dreadfully confused, of a sudden, and ran hastily out
of the room, laughing and blushing.

"What a dear little thing she is," thought the prince, and immediately
forgot all about her.

He walked to the far end of the verandah, where the sofa stood, with
a table in front of it. Here he sat down and covered his face with his
hands, and so remained for ten minutes. Suddenly he put his hand in his
coat-pocket and hurriedly produced three letters.

But the door opened again, and out came Colia.

The prince actually felt glad that he had been interrupted,--and might
return the letters to his pocket. He was glad of the respite.

"Well," said Colia, plunging in medias res, as he always did, "here's
a go! What do you think of Hippolyte now? Don't respect him any longer,
eh?"

"Why not? But look here, Colia, I'm tired; besides, the subject is too
melancholy to begin upon again. How is he, though?"

"Asleep--he'll sleep for a couple of hours yet. I quite
understand--you haven't slept--you walked about the park, I know.
Agitation--excitement--all that sort of thing--quite natural, too!"

"How do you know I walked in the park and didn't sleep at home?"

"Vera just told me. She tried to persuade me not to come, but I couldn't
help myself, just for one minute. I have been having my turn at the
bedside for the last two hours; Kostia Lebedeff is there now. Burdovsky
has gone. Now, lie down, prince, make yourself comfortable, and sleep
well! I'm awfully impressed, you know."

"Naturally, all this--"

"No, no, I mean with the 'explanation,' especially that part of it where
he talks about Providence and a future life. There is a gigantic thought
there."

The prince gazed affectionately at Colia, who, of course, had come in
solely for the purpose of talking about this "gigantic thought."

"But it is not any one particular thought, only; it is the general
circumstances of the case. If Voltaire had written this now, or
Rousseau, I should have just read it and thought it remarkable, but
should not have been so IMPRESSED by it. But a man who knows for
certain that he has but ten minutes to live and can talk like
that--why--it's--it's PRIDE, that is! It is really a most extraordinary,
exalted assertion of personal dignity, it's--it's DEFIANT! What a
GIGANTIC strength of will, eh? And to accuse a fellow like that of not
putting in the cap on purpose; it's base and mean! You know he deceived
us last night, the cunning rascal. I never packed his bag for him, and
I never saw his pistol. He packed it himself. But he put me off my guard
like that, you see. Vera says you are going to let him stay on; I swear
there's no danger, especially as we are always with him."

"Who was by him at night?"

"I, and Burdovsky, and Kostia Lebedeff. Keller stayed a little while,
and then went over to Lebedeff's to sleep. Ferdishenko slept at
Lebedeff's, too; but he went away at seven o'clock. My father is always
at Lebedeff's; but he has gone out just now. I dare say Lebedeff will be
coming in here directly; he has been looking for you; I don't know what
he wants. Shall we let him in or not, if you are asleep? I'm going to
have a nap, too. By-the-by, such a curious thing happened. Burdovsky
woke me at seven, and I met my father just outside the room, so drunk,
he didn't even know me. He stood before me like a log, and when he
recovered himself, asked hurriedly how Hippolyte was. 'Yes,' he said,
when I told him, 'that's all very well, but I REALLY came to warn you
that you must be very careful what you say before Ferdishenko.' Do you
follow me, prince?"

"Yes. Is it really so? However, it's all the same to us, of course."

"Of course it is; we are not a secret society; and that being the case,
it is all the more curious that the general should have been on his way
to wake me up in order to tell me this."

"Ferdishenko has gone, you say?"

"Yes, he went at seven o'clock. He came into the room on his way out; I
was watching just then. He said he was going to spend 'the rest of the
night' at Wilkin's; there's a tipsy fellow, a friend of his, of that
name. Well, I'm off. Oh, here's Lebedeff himself! The prince wants to go
to sleep, Lukian Timofeyovitch, so you may just go away again."

"One moment, my dear prince, just one. I must absolutely speak to you
about something which is most grave," said Lebedeff, mysteriously and
solemnly, entering the room with a bow and looking extremely important.
He had but just returned, and carried his hat in his hand. He looked
preoccupied and most unusually dignified.

The prince begged him to take a chair.

"I hear you have called twice; I suppose you are still worried about
yesterday's affair."

"What, about that boy, you mean? Oh dear no, yesterday my ideas were
a little--well--mixed. Today, I assure you, I shall not oppose in the
slightest degree any suggestions it may please you to make."

"What's up with you this morning, Lebedeff? You look so important and
dignified, and you choose your words so carefully," said the prince,
smiling.

"Nicolai Ardalionovitch!" said Lebedeff, in a most amiable tone of
voice, addressing the boy. "As I have a communication to make to the
prince which concerns only myself--"

"Of course, of course, not my affair. All right," said Colia, and away
he went.

"I love that boy for his perception," said Lebedeff, looking after
him. "My dear prince," he continued, "I have had a terrible misfortune,
either last night or early this morning. I cannot tell the exact time."

"What is it?"

"I have lost four hundred roubles out of my side pocket! They're gone!"
said Lebedeff, with a sour smile.

"You've lost four hundred roubles? Oh! I'm sorry for that."

"Yes, it is serious for a poor man who lives by his toil."

"Of course, of course! How was it?"

"Oh, the wine is to blame, of course. I confess to you, prince, as I
would to Providence itself. Yesterday I received four hundred roubles
from a debtor at about five in the afternoon, and came down here by
train. I had my purse in my pocket. When I changed, I put the money
into the pocket of my plain clothes, intending to keep it by me, as I
expected to have an applicant for it in the evening."

"It's true then, Lebedeff, that you advertise to lend money on gold or
silver articles?"

"Yes, through an agent. My own name doesn't appear. I have a large
family, you see, and at a small percentage--"

"Quite so, quite so. I only asked for information--excuse the question.
Go on."

"Well, meanwhile that sick boy was brought here, and those guests came
in, and we had tea, and--well, we made merry--to my ruin! Hearing of
your birthday afterwards, and excited with the circumstances of the
evening, I ran upstairs and changed my plain clothes once more for my
uniform [Civil Service clerks in Russia wear uniform.]--you must have
noticed I had my uniform on all the evening? Well, I forgot the money in
the pocket of my old coat--you know when God will ruin a man he first
of all bereaves him of his senses--and it was only this morning at
half-past seven that I woke up and grabbed at my coat pocket, first
thing. The pocket was empty--the purse gone, and not a trace to be
found!"

"Dear me! This is very unpleasant!"

"Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate
expression," said Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.

"But what's to be done? It's a serious matter," said the prince,
thoughtfully. "Don't you think you may have dropped it out of your
pocket whilst intoxicated?"

"Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly
express it, prince. But consider--if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an
object out of my pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on
the ground. Where is the object, then?"

"Didn't you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?"

"I've looked everywhere, and turned out everything."

"I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up,
then."

"Or taken it out of my pocket--two alternatives."

"It is very distressing, because WHO--? That's the question!"

"Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it--that is the very
question. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few
words!"

"Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It's a serious--"

"Sarcasm!" cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands. "All right, all right,
I'm not angry. I'm only put out about this. Whom do you suspect?"

"That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the
servant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect
any of my children."

"I should think not. Go on."

"Then it must be one of the guests."

"Is such a thing possible?"

"Absolutely and utterly impossible--and yet, so it must be. But one
thing I am sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the
evening when we were all together, but either at night or early in the
morning; therefore, by one of those who slept here. Burdovsky and Colia
I except, of course. They did not even come into my room."

"Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?"

"Four of us, including myself, in two rooms. The general, myself,
Keller, and Ferdishenko. One of us four it must have been. I don't
suspect myself, though such cases have been known."

"Oh! _do_ go on, Lebedeff! Don't drag it out so."

"Well, there are three left, then--Keller firstly. He is a drunkard
to begin with, and a liberal (in the sense of other people's pockets),
otherwise with more of the ancient knight about him than of the modern
liberal. He was with the sick man at first, but came over afterwards
because there was no place to lie down in the room and the floor was so
hard."

"You suspect him?"

"I DID suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my hair
in despair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was
sleeping the sleep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the
sudden disappearance of Ferdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we
decided to search Keller, who was lying there sleeping like a top. Well,
we searched his clothes thoroughly, and not a farthing did we find; in
fact, his pockets all had holes in them. We found a dirty handkerchief,
and a love-letter from some scullery-maid. The general decided that he
was innocent. We awoke him for further inquiries, and had the greatest
difficulty in making him understand what was up. He opened his mouth and
stared--he looked so stupid and so absurdly innocent. It wasn't Keller."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said the prince, joyfully. "I was so afraid."

"Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the
culprit?" said Lebedeff, frowning.

"Oh no--not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid! Don't
repeat it please, Lebedeff, don't tell anyone I said that!"

"My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart--it is
their tomb!" said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region of
his heart.

"Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it's Ferdishenko; that is, I mean,
you suspect Ferdishenko?"

"Whom else?" said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince s
face.

"Of course--quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?"

"We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at
seven o'clock, or even earlier."

"I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to--I forget the
name, some friend of his, to finish the night."

"H'm! then Colia has spoken to you already?"

"Not about the theft."

"He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko
went off to Wilkin's. That is not so curious in itself, but here the
evidence opens out further. He left his address, you see, when he went.
Now prince, consider, why did he leave his address? Why do you suppose
he went out of his way to tell Colia that he had gone to Wilkin's? Who
cared to know that he was going to Wilkin's? No, no! prince, this is
finesse, thieves' finesse! This is as good as saying, 'There, how can I
be a thief when I leave my address? I'm not concealing my movements as a
thief would.' Do you understand, prince?"

"Oh yes, but that is not enough."

"Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given
is a sham. An hour after--that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin's
myself, and there was no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me,
certainly, that an hour or so since someone had been hammering at the
door, and had smashed the bell; she said she would not open the door
because she didn't want to wake her master; probably she was too lazy to
get up herself. Such phenomena are met with occasionally!"

"But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!"

"Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!" said Lebedeff
with almost servile amiability, smiling at the prince. There was a look
of cunning in his eyes, however.

"You should search your room and all the cupboards again," said the
prince, after a moment or two of silent reflection.

"But I have done so, my dear prince!" said Lebedeff, more sweetly than
ever.

"H'm! why must you needs go up and change your coat like that?" asked
the prince, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.

"Oh, don't be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am not
worth it! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf
of the criminal too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!"

"Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think
about," said the prince, irritably, "but what are you going to do, since
you are so sure it was Ferdishenko?"

"But who else COULD it be, my very dear prince?" repeated Lebedeff, as
sweet as sugar again. "If you don't wish me to suspect Mr. Burdovsky?"

"Of course not."

"Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Nonsense!" said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.

"Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the
general! We went off on the hot scent to Wilkin's together, you know;
but I must first observe that the general was even more thunderstruck
than I myself this morning, when I awoke him after discovering the
theft; so much so that his very face changed--he grew red and then pale,
and at length flew into a paroxysm of such noble wrath that I assure you
I was quite surprised! He is a most generous-hearted man! He tells lies
by the thousands, I know, but it is merely a weakness; he is a man of
the highest feelings; a simple-minded man too, and a man who carries the
conviction of innocence in his very appearance. I love that man, sir; I
may have told you so before; it is a weakness of mine. Well--he suddenly
stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat and bared his
breast. 'Search me,' he says, 'you searched Keller; why don't you search
me too? It is only fair!' says he." And all the while his legs and hands
were trembling with anger, and he as white as a sheet all over! So I
said to him, "Nonsense, general; if anybody but yourself had said that
to me, I'd have taken my head, my own head, and put it on a large dish
and carried it round to anyone who suspected you; and I should have
said: 'There, you see that head? It's my head, and I'll go bail with
that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire for him, too. There,'
says I, 'that's how I'd answer for you, general!' Then he embraced me,
in the middle of the street, and hugged me so tight (crying over me all
the while) that I coughed fit to choke! 'You are the one friend left to
me amid all my misfortunes,' says he. Oh, he's a man of sentiment, that!
He went on to tell me a story of how he had been accused, or suspected,
of stealing five hundred thousand roubles once, as a young man; and how,
the very next day, he had rushed into a burning, blazing house and saved
the very count who suspected him, and Nina Alexandrovna (who was then
a young girl), from a fiery death. The count embraced him, and that was
how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As for the money, it
was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box with a secret
lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been for the
fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an
absolute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept!
She's a grand woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with
me!"

"Are you acquainted with her?"

"Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying
myself in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as
she thinks, encouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I
not only do not encourage him, but I actually keep him out of harm's
way, and out of bad company. Besides, he's my friend, prince, so that
I shall not lose sight of him, again. Where he goes, I go. He's quite
given up visiting the captain's widow, though sometimes he thinks sadly
of her, especially in the morning, when he's putting on his boots. I
don't know why it's at that time. But he has no money, and it's no
use his going to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you,
prince?"

"No, he has not."

"Ah, he's ashamed to! He MEANT to ask you, I know, for he said so. I
suppose he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you
would probably refuse if he asked you again."

"Do you ever give him money?"

"Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my
very life, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that's exaggeration; not life,
we'll say, but some illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that
sort, I would stand with pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a
great man fallen--money, indeed!"

"H'm, then you DO give him money?"

"N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never
give him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate
ways. He is going to town with me now; for you must know I am off to
Petersburg after Ferdishenko, while the scent is hot; I'm certain he is
there. I shall let the general go one way, while I go the other; we have
so arranged matters in order to pop out upon Ferdishenko, you see, from
different sides. But I am going to follow that naughty old general and
catch him, I know where, at a certain widow's house; for I think it will
be a good lesson, to put him to shame by catching him with the widow."

"Oh, Lebedeff, don't, don't make any scandal about it!" said the prince,
much agitated, and speaking in a low voice.

"Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed
of himself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I
cannot help thinking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you,
esteemed prince; I confess that it is the chief object of my visit. You
know the Ivolgins, you have even lived in their house; so if you would
lend me your help, honoured prince, in the general's own interest and
for his good."

Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.

"What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most
anxious to understand you, Lebedeff."

"I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage
it with the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely
watched in his own house. Unfortunately I am not on terms...
otherwise... but Nicolai Ardalionovitch, who adores you with all his
youthful soul, might help, too."

"No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this
business! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood
you, Lebedeff?"

Lebedeff made an impatient movement.

"But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that
is all--that is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to
consider him an invalid?"

"Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part."

"I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You
know the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is
crazy about that captain's widow, and he cannot go to her without
money, and I mean to catch him at her house today--for his own good; but
supposing it was not only the widow, but that he had committed a real
crime, or at least some very dishonourable action (of which he is, of
course, incapable), I repeat that even in that case, if he were treated
with what I may call generous tenderness, one could get at the whole
truth, for he is very soft-hearted! Believe me, he would betray himself
before five days were out; he would burst into tears, and make a clean
breast of the matter; especially if managed with tact, and if you and
his family watched his every step, so to speak. Oh, my dear prince,"
Lebedeff added most emphatically, "I do not positively assert that he
has... I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my last drop of blood for
him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery, drunkenness, and
the captain's widow, all these together may lead him very far."

"I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a
case," said the prince, rising; "but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am
terribly perplexed. Tell me, do you still think... plainly, you say
yourself that you suspect Mr. Ferdishenko?"

Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.

"Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken
prince?" he replied, with an unctuous smile.

Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.

"You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing. This
Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who
knows? Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more
likely man than... than any other."

Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was
saying. The latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up
and down, trying not to look at Lebedeff.

"You see," he said, "I was given to understand that Ferdishenko was that
sort of man,--that one can't say everything before him. One has to take
care not to say too much, you understand? I say this to prove that he
really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this than anyone else,
eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a mistake."

"And who told you this about Ferdishenko?"

"Oh, I was told. Of course I don't altogether believe it. I am very
sorry that I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don't
believe it myself; it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to
say anything about it."

"You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you
got this report from," said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his
seat, and was trying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up
and down. "Because look here, prince, I don't mind telling you now that
as we were going along to Wilkin's this morning, after telling me what
you know about the fire, and saving the count and all that, the general
was pleased to drop certain hints to the same effect about Ferdishenko,
but so vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to put a few questions
to him on the matter, with the result that I found the whole thing was
an invention of his excellency's own mind. Of course, he only lies with
the best intentions; still, he lies. But, such being the case, where
could you have heard the same report? It was the inspiration of the
moment with him, you understand, so who could have told YOU? It is an
important question, you see!"

"It was Colia told me, and his father told HIM at about six this
morning. They met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for
something or other." The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made
known to himself, in detail.

"There now, that's what we may call SCENT!" said Lebedeff, rubbing his
hands and laughing silently. "I thought it must be so, you see. The
general interrupted his innocent slumbers, at six o'clock, in order
to go and wake his beloved son, and warn him of the dreadful danger of
companionship with Ferdishenko. Dear me! what a dreadfully dangerous man
Ferdishenko must be, and what touching paternal solicitude, on the part
of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!"

"Listen, Lebedeff," began the prince, quite overwhelmed; "DO act
quietly--don't make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask you--I entreat you! No
one must know--NO ONE, mind! In that case only, I will help you."

"Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes--be assured that
the whole matter shall be buried within my heart!" cried Lebedeff, in a
paroxysm of exaltation. "I'd give every drop of my blood... Illustrious
prince, I am a poor wretch in soul and spirit, but ask the veriest
scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal with one like himself, or with
a noble-hearted man like you, and there is no doubt as to his choice!
He'll answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man--and there you
have the triumph of virtue! Au revoir, honoured prince! You and I
together--softly! softly!"

X.

THE prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time
he thought of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off
reading them until the evening.

When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without
having had the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he
again dreamed a painful dream, and once more that poor, "sinful" woman
appeared to him. Again she gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long
lashes, and beckoned him after her; and again he awoke, as before, with
the picture of her face haunting him.

He longed to get up and go to her at once--but he COULD NOT. At length,
almost in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.

These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange,
impossible dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we
remember them and wonder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps,
that you were in full possession of your reason during this succession
of fantastic images; even that you acted with extraordinary logic and
cunning while surrounded by murderers who hid their intentions and made
great demonstrations of friendship, while waiting for an opportunity
to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped them by some ingenious
stratagem; then you doubted if they were really deceived, or whether
they were only pretending not to know your hiding-place; then you
thought of another plan and hoodwinked them once again. You remember all
this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly accepted all
the manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your
dream? One of the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your
very eyes; then the woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little
dwarf; and you believed it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of
course--while at the same time your intelligence seemed unusually keen,
and accomplished miracles of cunning, sagacity, and logic! Why is it
that when you awake to the world of realities you nearly always feel,
sometimes very vividly, that the vanished dream has carried with it some
enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile at the extravagance
of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of absurdity contained
some real idea, something that belongs to your true life,--something
that exists, and has always existed, in your heart. You search your
dream for some prophecy that you were expecting. It has left a deep
impression upon you, joyful or cruel, but what it means, or what has
been predicted to you in it, you can neither understand nor remember.

The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince.
He felt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of
their existence was like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up
her mind to write to her? he asked himself. How could she write about
that at all? And how could such a wild idea have entered her head?
And yet, the strangest part of the matter was, that while he read the
letters, he himself almost believed in the possibility, and even in the
justification, of the idea he had thought so wild. Of course it was a
mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something cruelly real about
it. For hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several passages
returned again and again to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he
felt inclined to say to himself that he had foreseen and known all that
was written here; it even seemed to him that he had read the whole of
this some time or other, long, long ago; and all that had tormented and
grieved him up to now was to be found in these old, long since read,
letters.

"When you open this letter" (so the first began), "look first at the
signature. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain
nothing, nor attempt to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing
with you, you might be offended at my audacity; but who am I, and who
are you? We are at such extremes, and I am so far removed from you, that
I could not offend you if I wished to do so."

Farther on, in another place, she wrote: "Do not consider my words
as the sickly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my
opinion--perfection! I have seen you--I see you every day. I do not
judge you; I have not weighed you in the scales of Reason and found you
Perfection--it is simply an article of faith. But I must confess one sin
against you--I love you. One should not love perfection. One should
only look on it as perfection--yet I am in love with you. Though love
equalizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in
my most secret thoughts. I have written 'Do not fear,' as if you could
fear. I would kiss your footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting
myself on a level with you!--Look at the signature--quick, look at the
signature!"

"However, observe" (she wrote in another of the letters), "that although
I couple you with him, yet I have not once asked you whether you love
him. He fell in love with you, though he saw you but once. He spoke of
you as of 'the light.' These are his own words--I heard him use them.
But I understood without his saying it that you were all that light is
to him. I lived near him for a whole month, and I understood then that
you, too, must love him. I think of you and him as one."

"What was the matter yesterday?" (she wrote on another sheet). "I passed
by you, and you seemed to me to BLUSH. Perhaps it was only my fancy.
If I were to bring you to the most loathsome den, and show you the
revelation of undisguised vice--you should not blush. You can never feel
the sense of personal affront. You may hate all who are mean, or base,
or unworthy--but not for yourself--only for those whom they wrong. No
one can wrong YOU. Do you know, I think you ought to love me--for you
are the same in my eyes as in his-you are as light. An angel cannot
hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I often ask myself--is it possible to
love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in nature. Abstract love
of humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are different. You
cannot help loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above
all personal offence or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to
know that you felt anger or shame on my account, for that would be your
fall--you would become comparable at once with such as me.

"Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.

"Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel
stories. I should do differently. I should represent Christ alone--the
disciples did leave Him alone occasionally. I should paint one little
child left with Him. This child has been playing about near Him, and
had probably just been telling the Saviour something in its pretty
baby prattle. Christ had listened to it, but was now musing--one
hand reposing on the child's bright head. His eyes have a far-away
expression. Thought, great as the Universe, is in them--His face is sad.
The little one leans its elbow upon Christ's knee, and with its cheek
resting on its hand, gazes up at Him, pondering as children sometimes do
ponder. The sun is setting. There you have my picture.

"You are innocent--and in your innocence lies all your perfection--oh,
remember that! What is my passion to you?--you are mine now; I shall be
near you all my life--I shall not live long!"

At length, in the last letter of all, he found:

"For Heaven's sake, don't misunderstand me! Do not think that I
humiliate myself by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class
of people who take a satisfaction in humiliating themselves--from pride.
I have my consolation, though it would be difficult to explain it--but I
do not humiliate myself.

"Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own
sake, naturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved;
I have thought so for a long time. I know that once when your sister
Adelaida saw my portrait she said that such beauty could overthrow
the world. But I have renounced the world. You think it strange that
I should say so, for you saw me decked with lace and diamonds, in the
company of drunkards and wastrels. Take no notice of that; I know that
I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it is dwelling within me
now--it is not myself. I can see it every day in two dreadful eyes which
are always looking at me, even when not present. These eyes are silent
now, they say nothing; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy, and
there is a secret in it. I am convinced that in some box he has a razor
hidden, tied round with silk, just like the one that Moscow murderer
had. This man also lived with his mother, and had a razor hidden away,
tied round with white silk, and with this razor he intended to cut a
throat.

"All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath
the floor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in
oil-cloth, perhaps buried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the
Moscow case. I could have shown you the very spot!

"He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he
must hate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have
arranged with him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from
very fright, but he will kill me first. He has just burst out laughing,
and says that I am raving. He knows I am writing to you."

There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters--one of
them was very long.

At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had
wandered about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to
him to be lighter than ever. "It must be quite early," he thought. (He
had forgotten his watch.) There was a sound of distant music somewhere.
"Ah," he thought, "the Vauxhall! They won't be there today, of course!"
At this moment he noticed that he was close to their house; he had felt
that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, and, with a beating
heart, he mounted the verandah steps.

No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened
the door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty. He stood in the
middle of the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, and in came
Alexandra, candle in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him in
surprise, looking at him questioningly.

It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door
to door, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.

"How did you come here?" she asked, at last.

"I-I--came in--"

"Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and
I am just going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S.
have gone to town."

"I have come to you--now--to--"

"Do you know what time it is?"

"N--no!"

"Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one."

"I-I thought it was half-past nine!"

"Never mind!" she laughed, "but why didn't you come earlier? Perhaps you
were expected!"

"I thought" he stammered, making for the door.

"Au revoir! I shall amuse them all with this story tomorrow!"

He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating,
his thoughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a
dream.

And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the
same vision, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The
woman appeared to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front
of him, as though she had been waiting for him there.

He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.

No, this was no apparition!

There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since
their parting.

She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached
with anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting
with her, and he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of
mind.

She went on her knees before him--there in the open road--like a
madwoman. He retreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed
it, and, just as in his dream, the tears were sparkling on her long,
beautiful lashes.

"Get up!" he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. "Get up at
once!"

"Are you happy--are you happy?" she asked. "Say this one word. Are you
happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What did she
say?"

She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put
her questions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.

"I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me--I won't write--so that this
is the last time I shall see you, the last time! This is really the LAST
TIME!"

"Oh, be calm--be calm! Get up!" he entreated, in despair.

She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.

"Good-bye!" she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.

The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and
had taken her arm and was leading her away.

"Wait a minute, prince," shouted the latter, as he went. "I shall be
back in five minutes."

He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for
him.

"I've put her in the carriage," he said; "it has been waiting round the
corner there since ten o'clock. She expected that you would be with THEM
all the evening. I told her exactly what you wrote me. She won't write
to the girl any more, she promises; and tomorrow she will be off, as you
wish. She desired to see you for the last time, although you refused,
so we've been sitting and waiting on that bench till you should pass on
your way home."

"Did she bring you with her of her own accord?"

"Of course she did!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth; "and I saw for
myself what I knew before. You've read her letters, I suppose?"

"Did you read them?" asked the prince, struck by the thought.

"Of course--she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the
razor, eh? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Oh, she is mad!" cried the prince, wringing his hands. "Who knows?
Perhaps she is not so mad after all," said Rogojin, softly, as though
thinking aloud.

The prince made no reply.

"Well, good-bye," said Rogojin. "I'm off tomorrow too, you know.
Remember me kindly! By-the-by," he added, turning round sharply again,
"did you answer her question just now? Are you happy, or not?"

"No, no, no!" cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.

"Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say 'yes,'" cried Rogojin, laughing
sardonically.

And he disappeared, without looking round again.




PART IV

I.

A WEEK had elapsed since the rendezvous of our two friends on the
green bench in the park, when, one fine morning at about half-past ten
o'clock, Varvara Ardalionovna, otherwise Mrs. Ptitsin, who had been
out to visit a friend, returned home in a state of considerable mental
depression.

There are certain people of whom it is difficult to say anything which
will at once throw them into relief--in other words, describe them
graphically in their typical characteristics. These are they who are
generally known as "commonplace people," and this class comprises, of
course, the immense majority of mankind. Authors, as a rule, attempt to
select and portray types rarely met with in their entirety, but these
types are nevertheless more real than real life itself.

"Podkoleosin" [A character in Gogol's comedy, The Wedding.] was perhaps
an exaggeration, but he was by no means a non-existent character; on the
contrary, how many intelligent people, after hearing of this Podkoleosin
from Gogol, immediately began to find that scores of their friends were
exactly like him! They knew, perhaps, before Gogol told them, that their
friends were like Podkoleosin, but they did not know what name to give
them. In real life, young fellows seldom jump out of the window just
before their weddings, because such a feat, not to speak of its other
aspects, must be a decidedly unpleasant mode of escape; and yet there
are plenty of bridegrooms, intelligent fellows too, who would be ready
to confess themselves Podkoleosins in the depths of their consciousness,
just before marriage. Nor does every husband feel bound to repeat
at every step, "Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!" like another typical
personage; and yet how many millions and billions of Georges Dandins
there are in real life who feel inclined to utter this soul-drawn cry
after their honeymoon, if not the day after the wedding! Therefore,
without entering into any more serious examination of the question, I
will content myself with remarking that in real life typical characters
are "watered down," so to speak; and all these Dandins and Podkoleosins
actually exist among us every day, but in a diluted form. I will just
add, however, that Georges Dandin might have existed exactly as Moliere
presented him, and probably does exist now and then, though rarely; and
so I will end this scientific examination, which is beginning to
look like a newspaper criticism. But for all this, the question
remains,--what are the novelists to do with commonplace people, and how
are they to be presented to the reader in such a form as to be in
the least degree interesting? They cannot be left out altogether, for
commonplace people meet one at every turn of life, and to leave them out
would be to destroy the whole reality and probability of the story. To
fill a novel with typical characters only, or with merely strange and
uncommon people, would render the book unreal and improbable, and
would very likely destroy the interest. In my opinion, the duty of the
novelist is to seek out points of interest and instruction even in the
characters of commonplace people.

For instance, when the whole essence of an ordinary person's nature lies
in his perpetual and unchangeable commonplaceness; and when in spite of
all his endeavours to do something out of the common, this person ends,
eventually, by remaining in his unbroken line of routine--. I think
such an individual really does become a type of his own--a type of
commonplaceness which will not for the world, if it can help it,
be contented, but strains and yearns to be something original and
independent, without the slightest possibility of being so. To
this class of commonplace people belong several characters in this
novel;--characters which--I admit--I have not drawn very vividly up to
now for my reader's benefit.

Such were, for instance, Varvara Ardalionovna Ptitsin, her husband, and
her brother, Gania.

There is nothing so annoying as to be fairly rich, of a fairly good
family, pleasing presence, average education, to be "not stupid,"
kind-hearted, and yet to have no talent at all, no originality, not a
single idea of one's own--to be, in fact, "just like everyone else."

Of such people there are countless numbers in this world--far more even
than appear. They can be divided into two classes as all men can--that
is, those of limited intellect, and those who are much cleverer. The
former of these classes is the happier.

To a commonplace man of limited intellect, for instance, nothing is
simpler than to imagine himself an original character, and to revel in
that belief without the slightest misgiving.

Many of our young women have thought fit to cut their hair short, put on
blue spectacles, and call themselves Nihilists. By doing this they have
been able to persuade themselves, without further trouble, that they
have acquired new convictions of their own. Some men have but felt some
little qualm of kindness towards their fellow-men, and the fact has
been quite enough to persuade them that they stand alone in the van of
enlightenment and that no one has such humanitarian feelings as they.
Others have but to read an idea of somebody else's, and they can
immediately assimilate it and believe that it was a child of their own
brain. The "impudence of ignorance," if I may use the expression, is
developed to a wonderful extent in such cases;--unlikely as it appears,
it is met with at every turn.

This confidence of a stupid man in his own talents has been wonderfully
depicted by Gogol in the amazing character of Pirogoff. Pirogoff has
not the slightest doubt of his own genius,--nay, of his SUPERIORITY of
genius,--so certain is he of it that he never questions it. How
many Pirogoffs have there not been among our writers--scholars,
propagandists? I say "have been," but indeed there are plenty of them at
this very day.

Our friend, Gania, belonged to the other class--to the "much cleverer"
persons, though he was from head to foot permeated and saturated with
the longing to be original. This class, as I have said above, is far
less happy. For the "clever commonplace" person, though he may possibly
imagine himself a man of genius and originality, none the less has
within his heart the deathless worm of suspicion and doubt; and this
doubt sometimes brings a clever man to despair. (As a rule, however,
nothing tragic happens;--his liver becomes a little damaged in the
course of time, nothing more serious. Such men do not give up their
aspirations after originality without a severe struggle,--and there have
been men who, though good fellows in themselves, and even benefactors
to humanity, have sunk to the level of base criminals for the sake of
originality).

Gania was a beginner, as it were, upon this road. A deep and
unchangeable consciousness of his own lack of talent, combined with a
vast longing to be able to persuade himself that he was original, had
rankled in his heart, even from childhood.

He seemed to have been born with overwrought nerves, and in his
passionate desire to excel, he was often led to the brink of some
rash step; and yet, having resolved upon such a step, when the moment
arrived, he invariably proved too sensible to take it. He was ready,
in the same way, to do a base action in order to obtain his wished-for
object; and yet, when the moment came to do it, he found that he was too
honest for any great baseness. (Not that he objected to acts of petty
meanness--he was always ready for THEM.) He looked with hate and
loathing on the poverty and downfall of his family, and treated his
mother with haughty contempt, although he knew that his whole future
depended on her character and reputation.

Aglaya had simply frightened him; yet he did not give up all thoughts of
her--though he never seriously hoped that she would condescend to him.
At the time of his "adventure" with Nastasia Philipovna he had come to
the conclusion that money was his only hope--money should do all for
him.

At the moment when he lost Aglaya, and after the scene with Nastasia, he
had felt so low in his own eyes that he actually brought the money back
to the prince. Of this returning of the money given to him by a madwoman
who had received it from a madman, he had often repented since--though
he never ceased to be proud of his action. During the short time that
Muishkin remained in Petersburg Gania had had time to come to hate him
for his sympathy, though the prince told him that it was "not everyone
who would have acted so nobly" as to return the money. He had long
pondered, too, over his relations with Aglaya, and had persuaded himself
that with such a strange, childish, innocent character as hers, things
might have ended very differently. Remorse then seized him; he threw up
his post, and buried himself in self-torment and reproach.

He lived at Ptitsin's, and openly showed contempt for the latter, though
he always listened to his advice, and was sensible enough to ask for it
when he wanted it. Gavrila Ardalionovitch was angry with Ptitsin because
the latter did not care to become a Rothschild. "If you are to be a
Jew," he said, "do it properly--squeeze people right and left, show some
character; be the King of the Jews while you are about it."

Ptitsin was quiet and not easily offended--he only laughed. But on one
occasion he explained seriously to Gania that he was no Jew, that he
did nothing dishonest, that he could not help the market price of money,
that, thanks to his accurate habits, he had already a good footing and
was respected, and that his business was flourishing.

"I shan't ever be a Rothschild, and there is no reason why I should," he
added, smiling; "but I shall have a house in the Liteynaya, perhaps two,
and that will be enough for me." "Who knows but what I may have three!"
he concluded to himself; but this dream, cherished inwardly, he never
confided to a soul.

Nature loves and favours such people. Ptitsin will certainly have his
reward, not three houses, but four, precisely because from childhood up
he had realized that he would never be a Rothschild. That will be the
limit of Ptitsin's fortune, and, come what may, he will never have more
than four houses.

Varvara Ardalionovna was not like her brother. She too, had passionate
desires, but they were persistent rather than impetuous. Her plans were
as wise as her methods of carrying them out. No doubt she also belonged
to the category of ordinary people who dream of being original, but she
soon discovered that she had not a grain of true originality, and she
did not let it trouble her too much. Perhaps a certain kind of pride
came to her help. She made her first concession to the demands of
practical life with great resolution when she consented to marry
Ptitsin. However, when she married she did not say to herself, "Never
mind a mean action if it leads to the end in view," as her brother would
certainly have said in such a case; it is quite probable that he may
have said it when he expressed his elder-brotherly satisfaction at her
decision. Far from this; Varvara Ardalionovna did not marry until she
felt convinced that her future husband was unassuming, agreeable,
almost cultured, and that nothing on earth would tempt him to a really
dishonourable deed. As to small meannesses, such trifles did not trouble
her. Indeed, who is free from them? It is absurd to expect the ideal!
Besides, she knew that her marriage would provide a refuge for all her
family. Seeing Gania unhappy, she was anxious to help him, in spite of
their former disputes and misunderstandings. Ptitsin, in a friendly way,
would press his brother-in-law to enter the army. "You know," he said
sometimes, jokingly, "you despise generals and generaldom, but you will
see that 'they' will all end by being generals in their turn. You will
see it if you live long enough!"

"But why should they suppose that I despise generals?" Gania thought
sarcastically to himself.

To serve her brother's interests, Varvara Ardalionovna was constantly at
the Epanchins' house, helped by the fact that in childhood she and Gania
had played with General Ivan Fedorovitch's daughters. It would have been
inconsistent with her character if in these visits she had been pursuing
a chimera; her project was not chimerical at all; she was building on
a firm basis--on her knowledge of the character of the Epanchin family,
especially Aglaya, whom she studied closely. All Varvara's efforts
were directed towards bringing Aglaya and Gania together. Perhaps she
achieved some result; perhaps, also, she made the mistake of depending
too much upon her brother, and expecting more from him than he would
ever be capable of giving. However this may be, her manoeuvres were
skilful enough. For weeks at a time she would never mention Gania. Her
attitude was modest but dignified, and she was always extremely truthful
and sincere. Examining the depths of her conscience, she found nothing
to reproach herself with, and this still further strengthened her in
her designs. But Varvara Ardalionovna sometimes remarked that she felt
spiteful; that there was a good deal of vanity in her, perhaps even of
wounded vanity. She noticed this at certain times more than at others,
and especially after her visits to the Epanchins.

Today, as I have said, she returned from their house with a heavy
feeling of dejection. There was a sensation of bitterness, a sort of
mocking contempt, mingled with it.

Arrived at her own house, Varia heard a considerable commotion going
on in the upper storey, and distinguished the voices of her father and
brother. On entering the salon she found Gania pacing up and down at
frantic speed, pale with rage and almost tearing his hair. She frowned,
and subsided on to the sofa with a tired air, and without taking the
trouble to remove her hat. She very well knew that if she kept quiet and
asked her brother nothing about his reason for tearing up and down the
room, his wrath would fall upon her head. So she hastened to put the
question:

"The old story, eh?"

"Old story? No! Heaven knows what's up now--I don't! Father has simply
gone mad; mother's in floods of tears. Upon my word, Varia, I must kick
him out of the house; or else go myself," he added, probably remembering
that he could not well turn people out of a house which was not his own.

"You must make allowances," murmured Varia.

"Make allowances? For whom? Him--the old blackguard? No, no, Varia--that
won't do! It won't do, I tell you! And look at the swagger of the man!
He's all to blame himself, and yet he puts on so much 'side' that you'd
think--my word!--'It's too much trouble to go through the gate, you must
break the fence for me!' That's the sort of air he puts on; but what's
the matter with you, Varia? What a curious expression you have!"

"I'm all right," said Varia, in a tone that sounded as though she were
all wrong.

Gania looked more intently at her.

"You've been THERE?" he asked, suddenly.

"Yes."

"Did you find out anything?"

"Nothing unexpected. I discovered that it's all true. My husband was
wiser than either of us. Just as he suspected from the beginning, so it
has fallen out. Where is he?"

"Out. Well--what has happened?--go on."

"The prince is formally engaged to her--that's settled. The elder
sisters told me about it. Aglaya has agreed. They don't attempt to
conceal it any longer; you know how mysterious and secret they have all
been up to now. Adelaida's wedding is put off again, so that both can be
married on one day. Isn't that delightfully romantic? Somebody ought to
write a poem on it. Sit down and write an ode instead of tearing up
and down like that. This evening Princess Bielokonski is to arrive; she
comes just in time--they have a party tonight. He is to be presented
to old Bielokonski, though I believe he knows her already; probably the
engagement will be openly announced. They are only afraid that he may
knock something down, or trip over something when he comes into the
room. It would be just like him."

Gania listened attentively, but to his sister's astonishment he was by
no means so impressed by this news (which should, she thought, have been
so important to him) as she had expected.

"Well, it was clear enough all along," he said, after a moment's
reflection. "So that's the end," he added, with a disagreeable smile,
continuing to walk up and down the room, but much slower than before,
and glancing slyly into his sister's face.

"It's a good thing that you take it philosophically, at all events,"
said Varia. "I'm really very glad of it."

"Yes, it's off our hands--off YOURS, I should say."

"I think I have served you faithfully. I never even asked you what
happiness you expected to find with Aglaya."

"Did I ever expect to find happiness with Aglaya?"

"Come, come, don't overdo your philosophy. Of course you did. Now it's
all over, and a good thing, too; pair of fools that we have been! I
confess I have never been able to look at it seriously. I busied myself
in it for your sake, thinking that there was no knowing what might
happen with a funny girl like that to deal with. There were ninety to
one chances against it. To this moment I can't make out why you wished
for it."

"H'm! now, I suppose, you and your husband will never weary of egging
me on to work again. You'll begin your lectures about perseverance and
strength of will, and all that. I know it all by heart," said Gania,
laughing.

"He's got some new idea in his head," thought Varia. "Are they pleased
over there--the parents?" asked Gania, suddenly.

"N--no, I don't think they are. You can judge for yourself. I think the
general is pleased enough; her mother is a little uneasy. She always
loathed the idea of the prince as a HUSBAND; everybody knows that."

"Of course, naturally. The bridegroom is an impossible and ridiculous
one. I mean, has SHE given her formal consent?"

"She has not said 'no,' up to now, and that's all. It was sure to be so
with her. You know what she is like. You know how absurdly shy she is.
You remember how she used to hide in a cupboard as a child, so as to
avoid seeing visitors, for hours at a time. She is just the same now;
but, do you know, I think there is something serious in the matter, even
from her side; I feel it, somehow. She laughs at the prince, they say,
from morn to night in order to hide her real feelings; but you may be
sure she finds occasion to say something or other to him on the sly, for
he himself is in a state of radiant happiness. He walks in the clouds;
they say he is extremely funny just now; I heard it from themselves.
They seemed to be laughing at me in their sleeves--those elder girls--I
don't know why."

Gania had begun to frown, and probably Varia added this last sentence
in order to probe his thought. However, at this moment, the noise began
again upstairs.

"I'll turn him out!" shouted Gania, glad of the opportunity of venting
his vexation. "I shall just turn him out--we can't have this."

"Yes, and then he'll go about the place and disgrace us as he did
yesterday."

"How 'as he did yesterday'? What do you mean? What did he do yesterday?"
asked Gania, in alarm.

"Why, goodness me, don't you know?" Varia stopped short.

"What? You don't mean to say that he went there yesterday!" cried Gania,
flushing red with shame and anger. "Good heavens, Varia! Speak! You have
just been there. WAS he there or not, QUICK?" And Gania rushed for the
door. Varia followed and caught him by both hands.

"What are you doing? Where are you going to? You can't let him go now;
if you do he'll go and do something worse."

"What did he do there? What did he say?" "They couldn't tell me
themselves; they couldn't make head or tail of it; but he frightened
them all. He came to see the general, who was not at home; so he asked
for Lizabetha Prokofievna. First of all, he begged her for some place,
or situation, for work of some kind, and then he began to complain about
US, about me and my husband, and you, especially YOU; he said a lot of
things."

"Oh! couldn't you find out?" muttered Gania, trembling hysterically.

"No--nothing more than that. Why, they couldn't understand him
themselves; and very likely didn't tell me all."

Gania seized his head with both hands and tottered to the window; Varia
sat down at the other window.

"Funny girl, Aglaya," she observed, after a pause. "When she left me she
said, 'Give my special and personal respects to your parents; I shall
certainly find an opportunity to see your father one day,' and so
serious over it. She's a strange creature."

"Wasn't she joking? She was speaking sarcastically!" "Not a bit of it;
that's just the strange part of it."

"Does she know about father, do you think--or not?"

"That they do NOT know about it in the house is quite certain, the rest
of them, I mean; but you have given me an idea. Aglaya perhaps knows.
She alone, though, if anyone; for the sisters were as astonished as I
was to hear her speak so seriously. If she knows, the prince must have
told her."

"Oh! it's not a great matter to guess who told her. A thief! A thief in
our family, and the head of the family, too!"

"Oh! nonsense!" cried Varia, angrily. "That was nothing but a drunkard's
tale. Nonsense! Why, who invented the whole thing--Lebedeff and the
prince--a pretty pair! Both were probably drunk."

"Father is a drunkard and a thief; I am a beggar, and the husband of my
sister is a usurer," continued Gania, bitterly. "There was a pretty list
of advantages with which to enchant the heart of Aglaya."

"That same husband of your sister, the usurer--"

"Feeds me? Go on. Don't stand on ceremony, pray."

"Don't lose your temper. You are just like a schoolboy. You think that
all this sort of thing would harm you in Aglaya's eyes, do you? You
little know her character. She is capable of refusing the most brilliant
party, and running away and starving in a garret with some wretched
student; that's the sort of girl she is. You never could or did
understand how interesting you would have seen in her eyes if you had
come firmly and proudly through our misfortunes. The prince has simply
caught her with hook and line; firstly, because he never thought of
fishing for her, and secondly, because he is an idiot in the eyes of
most people. It's quite enough for her that by accepting him she puts
her family out and annoys them all round--that's what she likes. You
don't understand these things."

"We shall see whether I understand or no!" said Gania, enigmatically.
"But I shouldn't like her to know all about father, all the same. I
thought the prince would manage to hold his tongue about this, at least.
He prevented Lebedeff spreading the news--he wouldn't even tell me all
when I asked him--"

"Then you must see that he is not responsible. What does it matter to
you now, in any case? What are you hoping for still? If you HAVE a hope
left, it is that your suffering air may soften her heart towards you."

"Oh, she would funk a scandal like anyone else. You are all tarred with
one brush!"

"What! AGLAYA would have funked? You are a chicken-hearted fellow,
Gania!" said Varia, looking at her brother with contempt. "Not one of
us is worth much. Aglaya may be a wild sort of a girl, but she is far
nobler than any of us, a thousand times nobler!"

"Well--come! there's nothing to get cross about," said Gania.

"All I'm afraid of is--mother. I'm afraid this scandal about father may
come to her ears; perhaps it has already. I am dreadfully afraid."

"It undoubtedly has already!" observed Gania.

Varia had risen from her place and had started to go upstairs to her
mother; but at this observation of Gania's she turned and gazed at him
attentively.

"Who could have told her?"

"Hippolyte, probably. He would think it the most delightful amusement in
the world to tell her of it the instant he moved over here; I haven't a
doubt of it."

"But how could he know anything of it? Tell me that. Lebedeff and the
prince determined to tell no one--even Colia knows nothing."

"What, Hippolyte? He found it out himself, of course. Why, you have no
idea what a cunning little animal he is; dirty little gossip! He has
the most extraordinary nose for smelling out other people's secrets, or
anything approaching to scandal. Believe it or not, but I'm pretty sure
he has got round Aglaya. If he hasn't, he soon will. Rogojin is intimate
with him, too. How the prince doesn't notice it, I can't understand. The
little wretch considers me his enemy now and does his best to catch me
tripping. What on earth does it matter to him, when he's dying? However,
you'll see; I shall catch HIM tripping yet, and not he me."

"Why did you get him over here, if you hate him so? And is it really
worth your while to try to score off him?"

"Why, it was yourself who advised me to bring him over!"

"I thought he might be useful. You know he is in love with Aglaya
himself, now, and has written to her; he has even written to Lizabetha
Prokofievna!"

"Oh! he's not dangerous there!" cried Gania, laughing angrily. "However,
I believe there is something of that sort in the air; he is very likely
to be in love, for he is a mere boy. But he won't write anonymous
letters to the old lady; that would be too audacious a thing for him to
attempt; but I dare swear the very first thing he did was to show me up
to Aglaya as a base deceiver and intriguer. I confess I was fool enough
to attempt something through him at first. I thought he would throw
himself into my service out of revengeful feelings towards the prince,
the sly little beast! But I know him better now. As for the theft, he
may have heard of it from the widow in Petersburg, for if the old man
committed himself to such an act, he can have done it for no other
object but to give the money to her. Hippolyte said to me, without any
prelude, that the general had promised the widow four hundred roubles.
Of course I understood, and the little wretch looked at me with a nasty
sort of satisfaction. I know him; you may depend upon it he went and
told mother too, for the pleasure of wounding her. And why doesn't he
die, I should like to know? He undertook to die within three weeks,
and here he is getting fatter. His cough is better, too. It was only
yesterday that he said that was the second day he hadn't coughed blood."

"Well, turn him out!"

"I don't HATE, I despise him," said Gania, grandly. "Well, I do hate
him, if you like!" he added, with a sudden access of rage, "and I'll
tell him so to his face, even when he's dying! If you had but read his
confession--good Lord! what refinement of impudence! Oh, but I'd have
liked to whip him then and there, like a schoolboy, just to see how
surprised he would have been! Now he hates everybody because he--Oh, I
say, what on earth are they doing there! Listen to that noise! I really
can't stand this any longer. Ptitsin!" he cried, as the latter entered
the room, "what in the name of goodness are we coming to? Listen to
that--"

But the noise came rapidly nearer, the door burst open, and old General
Ivolgin, raging, furious, purple-faced, and trembling with anger, rushed
in. He was followed by Nina Alexandrovna, Colia, and behind the rest,
Hippolyte.

II.

HIPPOLYTE had now been five days at the Ptitsins'. His flitting from the
prince's to these new quarters had been brought about quite naturally
and without many words. He did not quarrel with the prince--in fact,
they seemed to part as friends. Gania, who had been hostile enough on
that eventful evening, had himself come to see him a couple of days
